---
title: '"Clone with" is coming!'
pretext: 'Also, a new blog post!'
---

Hi ::subscriber.first_name::

Lots of cool things to talk about today! First, I only just realized that **[the "clone with" RFC has passed](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/clone_with_v2)**! I'm deliberately using quotes though, because the syntax isn't entirely what I had in mind for it:

```php
public function withStatus(string $code): Response 
{
    return clone($this, [
        'code' => $code,
    ]);
}
```

`{php}clone` has now essentially become a language construct instead of a keyword, which makes it a lot more flexible to use. I'll have to read through the full RFC next week. Even though it's not entirely the syntax I was hoping for, I still think it's a neat feature to have in PHP, and I'm mostly happy that it'll be part of PHP 8.5!

Speaking of new PHP features, I realized that I had been using property hooks for about a year now: first testing the RFC while it was still in draft, then including it into Tempest pretty soon after it got merged. I sat down and wrote a blog post about **[my first year with property hooks](https://stitcher.io/blog/a-year-of-property-hooks)** — I'm eager to hear your thoughts!

I also wrote about an upcoming feature in PHP 8.5: the **[pipe operator](https://stitcher.io/blog/pipe-operator-in-php-85)**. This also seems like a solid addition to PHP, and I'm starting to get really impatient for PHP 8.5 to arrive!

```php
$output = $input 
    |> trim(...)
    |> fn (string $string) => 
        str_replace(' ', '-', $string)
    |> fn (string $string) => 
        str_replace(['.', '/', '…'], '', $string)
    |> strtolower(...);
```

Next, we released the new **[Mailing component for Tempest](https://tempestphp.com/blog/mail-component)**, which I'm super happy with as well. We're now working on a couple more features like Redis and oauth support, and I'm super excited for what the future brings!

Finally, I wanted to mention the **[Tempest Discord](https://tempestphp.com/discord)** in case you hadn't heard of it before. It's a place where now more than 500 PHP developers have gathered to talk about Tempest and PHP in general. Feel free to join if you want to!

That's it for this newsletter, thanks for reading!

Brent