As is common with minor releases, PHP 8.2 also adds some deprecations. It's important to keep in mind that deprecations aren't errors, they are warnings. In case you're interested in some followup reading: I've written a dedicated post about [how to deal with them](https://stitcher.io/blog/dealing-with-deprecations). 

I'd say this particular deprecation — deprecated dynamic properties — is a change for the better, but it will hurt a little bit. In PHP 8.2 you'll get a deprecation warning when using dynamic properties, and you'll get an `<hljs type>ErrorException</hljs>` in PHP 9.0. 

But hold on, what are dynamic properties exactly? Well, they are properties that aren't present on a class' definition, but are set or get on objects of those classes dynamically, at runtime:

```php
class Post
{
    public <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$title</hljs>;
}

// …

$post-><hljs prop>name</hljs> = 'Name';

<hljs prop>var_dump</hljs>($post-><hljs prop>name</hljs>); // 'Name'
```

As of PHP 8.2, this part will be deprecated:

```php
// …

$post-><hljs striped>name</hljs> = 'Name';
```

Now, don't worry: this deprecation won't affect any class that implements `<hljs prop>__get</hljs>` and `<hljs prop>__set</hljs>`. These magic functions are an important part of PHP, and will keep working as intended:

```php
class Post
{
    private <hljs type>array</hljs> <hljs prop>$properties</hljs> = [];
    
    public function __set(<hljs type>string</hljs> $name, <hljs type>mixed</hljs> $value): void
    {
        $this-><hljs prop>properties</hljs>[$name] = $value;
    }
}

// …

$post-><hljs prop>name</hljs> = 'Name';
```

The same goes for objects of `<hljs type>stdClass</hljs>`, they will keep supporting dynamic properties.

PHP used to be a very dynamic language, but has been moving away from that mindset for a while now. Personally I think it's a good thing to embrace stricter rules and rely on static analysis wherever possible, as I think it allows developers to write better code.

I can imagine there are developers who relied on dynamic properties, who are not happy with this change. I think those developers would benefit from taking a deeper look into static analysis. You can check out my [Road to PHP: Static Analysis](https://road-to-php.com/static) series if you want to learn more!

And _just in case_ you don't want these warnings when upgrading to PHP 8.2, there's a couple things you can do.

You can use the `#[<hljs type>AllowDynamicProperties</hljs>]` attribute on classes that should still allow those properties:

```php
#[<hljs type>AllowDynamicProperties</hljs>]
class Post
{
    public <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$title</hljs>;
}

// …

$post-><hljs prop>name</hljs> = 'Name'; // All fine
```

Or you could simply disable deprecation warnings. I wouldn't recommend doing that, since you'll get in trouble with PHP 9.0, but here's how you can disable deprecation warnings in PHP anyway:

```php
<hljs prop>error_reporting</hljs>(<hljs prop>E_ALL</hljs> ^ <hljs prop>E_DEPRECATED</hljs>);
```

So, yes: this deprecation might be a little painful, but I believe it's for the best of the language to do so. And remember that it won't be a fatal error until PHP 9.0, so there's plenty of time to deal with it.

Until tomorrow!

Brent
