First-class callables, a new way of writing callable syntax in PHP 8.1. Chances are you've written something like this before: 

<pre><code class="language-php hljs php" data-lang="php">$foo = [<span class="hljs-keyword">$this</span>, <span class="hljs-string">'foo'</span>];

$strlen = <span class="hljs-highlight  type">Closure</span>::<span class="hljs-highlight  prop">fromCallable</span>(<span class="hljs-string">'strlen'</span>);</code></pre>

In other words: creating a closure that references another kind of function, so that you can use that closure as a variable.




This is not the kind of thing I was completely frustrated about, rather it was a small annoyance I accepted — I'm talking about those 'string' names and arrays being used to reference the actual function. My IDE is smart enough to know what I'm talking about, so I put up with it over the last decade.

Still, I very much welcome the change that comes with PHP 8.1: proper built-in syntax to create such closures!

Here's what it'll look like:

<pre><code class="language-php hljs php" data-lang="php">$foo = <span class="hljs-keyword">$this</span>-><span class="hljs-highlight  prop">foo</span>(...);

$strlen = <span class="hljs-highlight  prop">strlen</span>(...)</code></pre>

Notice the three dots? They look similar to the spread operator, but they mean something different in this context. They are the new way of indicating that we're not actually calling the function, but rather store a closure that calls that function instead.

Good to know: you'll only ever write these three dots, regardless of the amount of arguments the function accepts. It also works with static functions, by the way:

<pre><code class="language-php hljs php" data-lang="php">$foo = <span class="hljs-highlight  type">MyClass</span>::<span class="hljs-highlight  prop">foo</span>(...);</code></pre>

What doesn't work though, is referencing a non-static function statically — I'm thinking about Laravel's route configuration, for example. You need the actual instance of a class to create the callable.

So, something like this wouldn't work:

<pre><code class="language-php hljs php" data-lang="php"><span class="hljs-class"><span class="hljs-keyword">class</span> <span class="hljs-title">MyController</span>
</span>{
    <span class="hljs-keyword">public</span> <span class="hljs-function"><span class="hljs-keyword">function</span> <span class="hljs-title">index</span><span class="hljs-params">()</span> </span>{ <span class="hljs-comment">/* … */</span> }
}

$action = <span class="hljs-highlight  striped"><span class="hljs-highlight  type">MyController</span>::<span class="hljs-highlight  prop">index</span>(...)</span>;</code></pre>

This might limit the use of first-class callables a little bit, though I'm still happy they are added. And who knows? There might be an improvement on them in a later PHP version?

I sure got many places where I'll be able to use them as soon as PHP 8.1 arrives, so I'm looking forward to them!

That's all for now, until tomorrow!

Brent
