PHP 8.2 adds three new types — or something that looks like it. Technically `<hljs type>null</hljs>`, `<hljs type>true</hljs>`, and `<hljs type>false</hljs>` could be considered valid types on their own. Common examples are PHP's built-in functions, where `<hljs type>false</hljs>` is used as the return type for when an error occurs. For example in `<hljs prop>file_get_contents</hljs>`:

```php
<hljs prop>file_get_contents</hljs>(/* … */): <hljs type>string|false</hljs>
```

Before PHP 8.2, you could already use `<hljs type>false</hljs>` together with other types as a union; but now it can be used as a standalone type as well:

```php
function alwaysFalse(): <hljs type>false</hljs>
{
    return false;
}
```

The same now also goes for `<hljs type>true</hljs>` and `<hljs type>null</hljs>`.

Many developers, including myself, are a bit wary about this addition: shouldn't types represent categories instead of individual values? It turns out there is a concept called [a unit type](*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_type) in type systems, which are types that only allow one value. So technically, yes, according to "the rules" it makes sense. However: I'm afraid it might easily lead to code rot. 

A standalone `<hljs type>null</hljs>` type makes a bit more sense: as `<hljs type>null</hljs>` can be considered a category on itself and not just a value within a category. Imagine, for example, [the null object pattern](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e0tstsbD4Ro):

```php
class Post 
{
    public function getAuthor(): ?string { /* … */ }
}

class NullPost extends Post
{
    public function getAuthor(): null { /* … */ }
}
```

It makes sense for `<hljs type>NullPost</hljs>::<hljs prop>getAuthor</hljs>()` to be able to say it will only ever return `<hljs type>null</hljs>`, instead of `<hljs type>null</hljs>` or `<hljs type>string</hljs>`, which previously wasn't possible to do.

Personally, I'd stay away from using `<hljs type>true</hljs>` and `<hljs type>false</hljs>` as a standalone types for conveying error states or other kinds of "results from functions" — I think there are better solutions to solving such problems. I can see some use cases for `<hljs type>null</hljs>` as a standalone type and I'll probably use it sporadically.

What's your opinion? Hit the reply button to let me know!

Until tomorrow!

Brent
