We've arrived at the final mail of this series, thanks for sticking around! 

Today, I want to focus on a group of changes in PHP 8.2: deprecations. We already covered the deprecation of dynamic properties a couple of days ago, but PHP 8.2 brings a bunch more deprecations to the table.

Before diving into what changed, let's first do a recap about deprecations in general. I'd say there are four important things to remember about them:

## 1. Deprecations are helpful

Without deprecations, the language would have a very hard time evolving. At the very best, it would make major updates even more painful. Deprecations are nothing more than a warning to the developer: "hey, this is going to break in a future version, you might as well fix it today".

It's thanks to deprecations and breaking changes that PHP can keep maturing, without dragging along all its legacy. We need to keep that in mind.

## 2. Deprecations can be silenced

Second, PHP internals go to great lengths to help userland developers in dealing with deprecations. Thanks to the addition of [attributes in PHP 8.0](https://stitcher.io/blog/attributes-in-php-8), we now have a much better and standardized way of communication between our code and PHP's interpreter.

Like for example with [dynamic properties being deprecated in PHP 8.2](https://stitcher.io/blog/new-in-php-82#deprecate-dynamic-properties-rfc), you can mark classes with the `<hljs type>AllowDynamicProperties</hljs>` attribute, making it so that they allow dynamic properties again and suppress the deprecation notice:

```php
#[<hljs type>\AllowDynamicProperties</hljs>]
class Post
{
}

// …

$post-><hljs prop>title</hljs> = 'Name';
```

## 3. They are notices, not fatal errors

PHP code will keep working just fine, even when parts of it trigger deprecation notices. Of course, you know by now that it's in your best interest to fix them if you ever want to upgrade to the next major version, but you don't need to do it right now. It's perfectly ok to upgrade your production projects and deal with deprecations notices over time.

## 4. Automation

Lastly, keep in mind that you don't need to do the boring tasks by hand. There are tools like [Rector](https://github.com/rectorphp/) and [phpcs](https://github.com/squizlabs/PHP_CodeSniffer/) that can take care of many upgrading issues for you. Usually it's a matter of running a script that takes a couple of minutes at most to scan and fix your codebase. That's work that you might need days for if you'd do it by hand.

It's not difficult or time consuming anymore to deal with PHP upgrades. In fact, deprecations help tremendously to create a smoother upgrade path and prepare your codebase for the future.

With all of that being said, let's take a look at the deprecations and small breaking changes in PHP 8.2.

---


## `<hljs prop>utf8_encode</hljs>()` and `<hljs prop>utf8_decode</hljs>()` deprecations

In PHP 8.2, using either `<hljs prop>utf8_encode</hljs>()` or `<hljs prop>utf8_decode</hljs>()` will trigger these deprecation notices:

```txt
Deprecated: Function utf8_encode() is deprecated
Deprecated: Function utf8_decode() is deprecated
```

The RFC argues that these functions have a inaccurate name that often causes confusion: these functions only convert between `ISO-8859-1` and `UTF-8`, while the function name suggest a more broader use. There's a more detailed explanation about the reasoning in the [RFC](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/remove_utf8_decode_and_utf8_encode).

The alternative? The RFC suggests using `<hljs prop>mb_convert_encoding</hljs>()` instead.

---


## Deprecate `${}` string interpolation

PHP has several ways of embedding variables in strings. This RFC deprecates two ways of doing so, since they are rarely used, and often lead to confusion:

```php
"Hello <hljs striped>${world}</hljs>";
```

```txt
Deprecated: Using ${} 
in strings is deprecated
```

```php
"Hello <hljs striped>${(<hljs prop>world</hljs>)}</hljs>";
```

```txt
Deprecated: Using ${} (variable variables) 
in strings is deprecated
```

To be clear: the two popular ways of string interpolation still work:

```php
"Hello {$world}";
"Hello $world";
```

---

## Deprecated dynamic properties

We already covered this deprecation in depth, but I makes sense to add it to this list as well: dynamic properties are deprecated in PHP 8.2:

```php
class Post
{
    public <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$title</hljs>;
}

// …

$post-><hljs striped>name</hljs> = 'Name';
```

---

## Deprecate partially supported callables

Another change is that partially supported callables are now deprecated as well. Partially supported callables are callables which can be called using `<hljs prop>call_user_func</hljs>($callable)`, but not by calling `$callable()` directly:

```php
"self::method"
"parent::method"
"static::method"
["self", "method"]
["parent", "method"]
["static", "method"]
["Foo", "Bar::method"]
[<hljs keyword>new</hljs> <hljs type>Foo</hljs>, "Bar::method"]
```

The reason for doing this? It's a step in the right direction towards being able to use `<hljs type>callable</hljs>` for typed properties. Nikita explains it very well in the RFC:

> all of these callables are context-dependent. The method that "self::method" refers to depends on which class the call or callability check is performed from. In practice, this usually also holds for the last two cases, when used in the form of [new Foo, "parent::method"].
>
> Reducing the context-dependence of callables is the secondary goal of this RFC. After this RFC, the only scope-dependence still left is method visibility: "Foo::bar" may be visible in one scope, but not another. If callables were to be limited to public methods in the future (while private methods would have to use first-class callables or Closure::fromCallable() to be made scope-independent), then the callable type would become well-defined and could be used as a property type. However, changes to visibility handling are not proposed as part of this RFC.

---

Besides deprecations, there are also some changes to internal method signatures and one change to how ODBC handles password escaping. All of these changes are technically breaking, although probably have a very small impact. I figure it makes sense to list them as well, so that you're aware of them.

---

## Locale-insensitive `<hljs prop>strtolower</hljs>()` and `<hljs prop>strtoupper</hljs>()`

Both `<hljs prop>strtolower</hljs>()` and `<hljs prop>strtoupper</hljs>()` are no longer locale-sensitive. You can use `<hljs prop>mb_strtolower</hljs>()` if you want localized case conversion.

---


## Signature changes to several SPL methods

Several methods of SPL classes have been changed to properly enforce their correct type signature:

```php
<hljs type>SplFileInfo</hljs>::<hljs prop>_bad_state_ex</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>getCsvControl</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>fflush</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>ftell</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>fgetc</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>fpassthru</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>hasChildren</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>getChildren</hljs>()
```
 
---


## ODBC username and password escaping

From the [UPGRADING](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING#L28-L39) guide:

> The `ODBC` extension now escapes the username and password for the case when
both a connection string and username/password are passed, and the string
must be appended to

The same applies to `PDO_ODBC`.

---

## Return type changes for `<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromImmutable</hljs>()` and `<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromMutable</hljs>()`

Previously, these methods looked like this:

```php
<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromImmutable</hljs>(): <hljs type>DateTime</hljs>
<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromMutable</hljs>(): <hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>
```

In PHP 8.2 those method signatures are changed like so:

```php
<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromImmutable</hljs>(): <hljs type>static</hljs>
<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromMutable</hljs>(): <hljs type>static</hljs>
```

This change makes a lot more sense, as it improves static insight possibilities for classes extending from `<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>` and `<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>`. However, technically, this is a breaking change that might affect custom implementations that extend from either of those two classes.

---

So, that's quite the list. But remember: deprecations are your friend, and there are tools that'll help automate the upgrade process.

With all of that being said, we've come to the end of this Road to PHP series! Like I mentioned in the beginning of this series, I _do_ want to pitch my [main newsletter](https://stitcher.io/newsletter/subscribe) one more time. I only send occasional mails and updates. If you want to stay in the loop about what's happening, then my newsletter is the way to go. 

Also, I wanted to mention my [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/user/BrenDtRoose). Video creation has been a passion of mine for years, and recently I've started to make high-quality, PHP related videos. Give it a look, and maybe subscribe if you want to? Thanks!

Finally, if you enjoyed this newsletter series, you might be interested in my other two newsletter series as well:

- [The Road to PHP 8.1](https://road-to-php.com/php-81)
- [The Road to PHP: Static Analysis](https://road-to-php.com/static)

That's all for now, you can trust that you'll be automatically unsubscribed from this list, you won't receive any mails anymore. Nevertheless, you can still reply to this email and let me know what you thought of it!

Thank you, enjoy PHP 8.2!

Brent
