Today we'll look at the new `<hljs type>SensitiveParameter</hljs>` attribute in PHP 8.2, which I think is a nice example of attributes in action!

A common practice in many projects is to send production errors to an external service that keeps track of those errors and will notify developers when something goes wrong. This practice often involves sending stack traces over the wire to a server you don't own. There are times where those stack traces  include sensitive information such as environment variables, passwords or usernames.

PHP 8.2 allows you to mark such "sensitive parameters" with an attribute, so that you don't need to worry about them being listed in your stack traces when something goes wrong.

Here's a dummy example:

```php
function test(
    $foo,
    #[<hljs type>\SensitiveParameter</hljs>] $bar,
    $baz
) {
    throw new <hljs type>Exception</hljs>('Error');
}
 
<hljs prop>test</hljs>('foo', 'bar', 'baz');
 
<hljs error full>Fatal error: 
Uncaught Exception: Error in test.php:8
Stack trace:
#0 test.php(11): test(
<hljs comment>   'foo',</hljs>
<hljs comment>   <hljs yellow>Object(SensitiveParameterValue)</hljs>,</hljs>
<hljs comment>   'baz'</hljs>
<hljs comment>)</hljs>
#1 {main}
  thrown in test.php on line 8</hljs>
```

Note that the redacted value is changed to an object of `<hljs type>\SensitiveParameterValue</hljs>`. While it might be easier to simply change redacted values to strings — something like `[redacted]` — it's actually good that we have a specific object that we can test for instead.

Imagine you'd want to parse your stack traces before sending them over, you couldn't check for `is_string` to know whether a value was redacted or not, because strings could be unredacted values as well. Instead you can do `<hljs keyword>instanceof</hljs> <hljs type>\SensitiveParameterValue</hljs>`, making for a much better experience than having to manually parse function definitions. 

Of course, this feature will be most useful to framework developers and package maintainers, but it's a very good addition indeed.

See you tomorrow!

Brent
