
## Return type changes for `<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromImmutable</hljs>()` and `<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromMutable</hljs>()`

Previously, these methods looked like this:

```php
<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromImmutable</hljs>(): <hljs type>DateTime</hljs>
<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromMutable</hljs>(): <hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>
```

In PHP 8.2 those method signatures are changed like so:

```php
<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromImmutable</hljs>(): <hljs type>static</hljs>
<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromMutable</hljs>(): <hljs type>static</hljs>
```

This change makes a lot more sense, as it improves static insight possibilities for classes extending from `<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>` and `<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>`. However, technically, this is a breaking change that might affect custom implementations that extend from either of those two classes. 

---


## `<hljs prop>utf8_encode</hljs>()` and `<hljs prop>utf8_decode</hljs>()` deprecations

In PHP 8.2, using either `<hljs prop>utf8_encode</hljs>()` or `<hljs prop>utf8_decode</hljs>()` will trigger these deprecation notices:

```txt
<hljs error full>Deprecated: Function utf8_encode() 
is deprecated
Deprecated: Function utf8_decode() 
is deprecated</hljs>
```

The RFC argues that these functions have a inaccurate name that often causes confusion: these functions only convert between `ISO-8859-1` and `UTF-8`, while the function name suggest a more broader use. There's a more detailed explanation about the reasoning in the [RFC](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/remove_utf8_decode_and_utf8_encode).

The alternative? The RFC suggests using `<hljs prop>mb_convert_encoding</hljs>()` instead.

---


## Locale-insensitive `<hljs prop>strtolower</hljs>()` and `<hljs prop>strtoupper</hljs>()`

Both `<hljs prop>strtolower</hljs>()` and `<hljs prop>strtoupper</hljs>()` are no longer locale-sensitive. You can use `<hljs prop>mb_strtolower</hljs>()` if you want localized case conversion.

---


## Signature changes to several SPL methods

Several methods of SPL classes have been changed to properly enforce their correct type signature:

```php
<hljs type>SplFileInfo</hljs>::<hljs prop>_bad_state_ex</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>getCsvControl</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>fflush</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>ftell</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>fgetc</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>fpassthru</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>hasChildren</hljs>()
<hljs type>SplFileObject</hljs>::<hljs prop>getChildren</hljs>()
```
 
---


## ODBC username and password escaping

From the [UPGRADING](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING#L28-L39) guide:

> The `ODBC` extension now escapes the username and password for the case when
both a connection string and username/password are passed, and the string
must be appended to

The same applies to `PDO_ODBC`.

---


## Deprecate `${}` string interpolation

PHP has several ways of embedding variables in strings. This RFC deprecates two ways of doing so, since they are rarely used, and often lead to confusion:

```php
"Hello <hljs striped>${world}</hljs>";
<hljs red full>Deprecated: Using ${} 
in strings is deprecated</hljs>
 
"Hello <hljs striped>${(<hljs prop>world</hljs>)}</hljs>";
<hljs red full>Deprecated: Using ${} (variable variables) 
in strings is deprecated</hljs>
```

To be clear: the two popular ways of string interpolation still work:

```php
"Hello {$world}";
"Hello $world";
```

---

## Deprecate partially supported callables

Another change, although one with a slightly smaller impact, is that partially supported callables are now deprecated as well. Partially supported callables are callables which can be called using `<hljs prop>call_user_func</hljs>($callable)`, but not by calling `$callable()` directly. The list of these kinds of callables is rather short, by the way:

```php
"self::method"
"parent::method"
"static::method"
["self", "method"]
["parent", "method"]
["static", "method"]
["Foo", "Bar::method"]
[<hljs keyword>new</hljs> <hljs type>Foo</hljs>, "Bar::method"]
```

The reason for doing this? It's a step in the right direction towards being able to use `<hljs type>callable</hljs>` for typed properties. Nikita explains it very well in the RFC:

> all of these callables are context-dependent. The method that "self::method" refers to depends on which class the call or callability check is performed from. In practice, this usually also holds for the last two cases, when used in the form of [new Foo, "parent::method"].
>
> Reducing the context-dependence of callables is the secondary goal of this RFC. After this RFC, the only scope-dependence still left is method visibility: "Foo::bar" may be visible in one scope, but not another. If callables were to be limited to public methods in the future (while private methods would have to use first-class callables or Closure::fromCallable() to be made scope-independent), then the callable type would become well-defined and could be used as a property type. However, changes to visibility handling are not proposed as part of this RFC.

---
