Tom walked through the village's streets with tears in his eyes, hoping those eyes were deceiving him.

At a distance, Birchbrook had seemed abandoned, though now that they had made their way into the streets, they discovered bodies of fallen swordsmen here and there. They had been clearly outnumbered by whatever struck them. As they made their way to the town square, their hope of finding any survivors diminished step by step. 

A roof collapsed, sending a cloud of embers high into the sky.

Overwhelmed by defeat, they halted in the middle of the square. Tom turned around in disbelief, June sobbed quietly, Adrian stood frozen.

Tom was the first to speak — whisper, actually. "We should," his words choked. "We should gather the dead."

Adrian nodded. June didn't reply.

"We don't know how many are still alive," Adrian said, trying to muster some hope.

"If anyone's still alive," Tom replied, "then I'm not sure if they are better off."

He walked the one of the bodies that laid just a couple of meters away from his. The face was completely charred at one side, but Tom vaguely recognised him. He couldn't remember his name though. This person was a swordsman, his sword still in his hand. Tom grabbed his legs and dragged. This was the only way he could fathom moving a body this size.

"I'm sorry," he whispered.

Adrian and June watched in silence as Tom dragged the body just a couple meters towards the very center of the square. Their gaze crossed when Tom let go of the legs — they fell with a muffled thud on the ground.

"Let's go," said Adrian while he poked June. "Let's help."

They continued to work in somber silence as they gathered bodies from the streets and dragged them to the town's square. As the day progressed, so did the amount of bodies. 27 in total now. Some unrecognizable, their face broken and mangled; others known, some even friends.

"I think we're almost done," Adrian said, as they took a moment of pause, overlooking the dead.

"Only the most southern part of the village still, I think," Tom replied. The surrounding fire had been slowly fading, and the sun was almost setting. The sky was dark with ash and smoke.

"Let's do one more sweep of the southern part then," Adrian said, as he turned around and walked away. Tom and June followed in silence.

They made their way through the streets which Tom and June had been walking every day since the start of their training — their training field was at the southern part of town. 

Suddenly, Adrian stopped. Causing Tom to startle. He turned around.

"Maybe you shouldn't," Adrian said, his face darkened in the little evening light there still was.

Tom and June looked at him in confusion for a moment. It was June who noticed first. In the darkness of the alley in front of them, she could make out the vague contours of a body. It took another moment before she noticed the oak staff laying beside it, broken in two.

As Tom moved beside June to look at what was going on, June fell to her knees, she cried and let out a loud scream. It was still echoing when Tom saw it as well: Master Jonan, two arrows in his chest, one of his hands still gripping the broken part of his staff, his blank eyes staring into nothingness.

---

Both spellcasters held their staff in front of them and closed their eyes. They kept their staff close until they felt the energy from the surrounding fires surging through their bodies. As if someone was signaling them, they opened their eyes simultaneously, drew their staff behind them, then slung forward. A ball of energy hurtled towards the lined up bodies. Immediately, the pile caught fire. All three survivors stood in silence, too tired for crying, as the newly lit fire blazed in front of them.

It took more than a moment before Adrian broke the silence. "We should set up camp outside the village."

Tom and June didn’t reply.

"Let’s go," he said, laying his hand on Tom’s shoulder. "We need to rest."

It took another hour before they had found a good camping spot and could set up their tents. Soon, they fell into a dark slumber with vague dreams and distant cries.

---

"Wake up", 

Tom had heard the voice say the words, but slipped back into slumber. "Wake up!", the voice repeated. As he opened his eyes, a chill went down his spine as he saw Master Jonan in front of him. The blank eyes looked straight at him.

"Wake up!" Tom startled, opening him eyes a second time. He woke up from his dream, with Adrian in front of him.

"There you are." He said, with a faint smile. "You were dreaming, I think."

"I was."

"Is it morning already?" Tom continued, only half awake.

"It is," June interjected, as she was sitting at the campfire, preparing breakfast. They set up camp at the top of a hill close to Birchbrook. Tom had been so tired that he had slept a good part of the morning. The sun was already shining bright when he woke up. It would have been a picturesque morning, were it not for last night’s trauma, engraved in his mind.

"Come," Adrian said as he held out his hand, "we need to talk."

They gathered around the campfire, and Adrian continued.

"I’ve been thinking all throughout the night. The most likely scenario is that an elven raid passed through Birchbrook. My guess is that the sound we heard on our way to the White Woods was them en route."

Adrian sighed.

"We probably passed them on their way back as well, when we ran into their scouting party."

"On their way back…" Tom repeated, "with prisoners."

"That could be, but we cannot be sure of that." Adrian intervened. "We shouldn’t draw early conclusions."

"My parents are with them," June whispered silently.

"We’re not sure of that, June". Adrian intervened once again. "Let’s think this through. Let’s assume our people were taken prisoners by elves. If we passed them on their way back yesterday morning, that would mean they are already in the northern parts of the White Woods by now, far out of our reach."

"So we’re giving up on them?" June shouted as she interrupted Adrian.

"No, I’m not. What I’m saying is that we cannot chase them on our own. If they were taken prisoner, we’ll need to set up a rescue party; and to do that, we’ll have to travel to Arduina."

"Now, let’s consider the alternative," Adrian continued, "our people might have fled the scene long before they were in any danger. We’re still not sure what these elves set out to do, so our people might simply be on the run."

"Where would they go?" Tom asked.

"Arduina seems the most likely."

"So, whatever we do," 

Adrian finished Tom's thought: "It’s best to mount and travel to Arduina as soon as possible, either we find our people along the way, or we reach Arduina to set up a rescue party."

They rode in silence that day, following the river further south, a familiar sight after their travels to the White Woods. When Tom was riding, he wondered about June. She had mostly kept to herself, but he was sure she'd feel the same things he was feeling. He desperately wanted to talk to June, but couldn't find the right words.

Throughout most of the day, Tom was fighting himself to talk to June, but he simply couldn't. After a long, frustrating while, he gave up.

That night, they settled on a campsite near the river. "You said we'd set up a rescue party in Arduina." Tom asked Adrian while setting up the tents.

"If it turns out our people didn't make it there," Adrian corrected, "there's absolutely no use in jumping at conclusions."

"What I'm wondering about" Tom continued without taking note of Adrian's advice, "How certain are you that these people will help us? I know we are neighbouring towns," Tom continued before Adrian could reply, "but it's not like we have a thriving bond with them. At least not as far as I know."

"I wouldn't worry," Adrian reassured. "Look, I've been to Arduina countless times, I know people there. You were setting out to continue your training there, right? Master Jonan had his connections as well. I'm fairly certain they'll take us serious and help us. Even better: they have to, our towns belong to the same clan, we're obliged to help each other."

Before Tom could answer, a loud explosion and a bright flash of light interrupted their conversation. Absolutely surprised, June shouted at them: "Sorry! I'm sorry! I didn't mean to!"

Bewildered by what happened, Tom and Adrian carefully approached June. They had left her on her own at the river, allowing her more time for her own thoughts.

June was standing in front of a scorched circle of grass, probably two meters in diameter.

"What did you do?" Tom asked, looking at the smoldering ground. 

"I'm practicing." June said as if there was no need to worry. 

"Was that an explosion?" Adrian interjected, at the same time he remembered the horses and frantically looked behind to see whether they were ok. They seemed on edge, but hadn't fled. Luckily, master Duke's horses were properly trained for battle.

"Yes, I'm sorry," June replied, "I didn't think it would cause that much damage."

"What did you do?" Tom asked again, still trying to understand how June was able to cast a spell that caused this much damage.

"I remembered master Jonan — " she paused for a second, "He told us about using our staves to channel much more energy into a single spell, do you remember that, Tom?"

"I do. I also remember he told us these kinds of powerful spells would be part of our training in Arduina, and that we shouldn't experiment with them before finding our new teacher!"

"Yeah, well. Things didn't turn out the way we wanted to, did they? I'm not going to sit around and wait for the next squad of sick elves to come and get us. Next time, I'll be ready!" June snatched, raising her voice.

"No but, June, this is dangerous! We clearly don't have the skills yet to cast these kinds of spell safely."

"No? Watch me!" June replied as she turned her back towards Tom and Adrian. She closed her eyes for just a split second, she drew energy from the flowing river besides her, and felt it build up as she raised her staff. She opened her eyes, and threw her spell to the horizon.

It exploded violently a couple of meters away from them, sending a wave of heat in all directions. By the time the wave hit June, one second after the explosion, it had already cooled down — cool enough to not burn them. The patch of grass, however, at the point where the spell exploded, was charred and smoking.

June stood in silence. She seemed tired and sad, but too stubborn to give in to any of those feelings.

"Maybe it's best to rest?" Tom asked carefully. 

Without saying a word, June turned around and ran away.

"Let her be," Adrian said as he laid his hand on Tom's shoulder. "Everyone deals with grief differently." 

"I know," was everything Tom said. But deep in his heart, he wished he could do something for her.

They went to sleep that evening without discussing the incident any further. Tom closed his eyes, allowing the restless dreams to start once again.