If it were up to me, I'd change a thing or two about PHP. 
Of course, I don't have anything to say about PHP's development, and that's ok. I still find it an interesting thought experiment to discover what changes I'd like to make to the language I use on a day-by-day basis and I'd love to hear [your thoughts](*https://twitter.com/brendt_gd) as well.
To be clear: it's a very subjective list and in no way a critique on the amazing work the core team is doing.

This is an updated version of an older post of mine, since PHP is [growing and evolving](/blog/new-in-php-8) year by year. Let's dive in!

{{ ad:carbon }}

## Final by default

A [common misconception](*https://front-line-php.com/object-oriented) about OO programming is that it's all about inheritance. 
Inheritance and polymorphism have their place, but OO is way more than that.

Because these principles are more often than not abused by programmers who claim they write "OO" code,
I think the language should help prevent us making these mistakes.

That's why I would make all classes final by default:

```php
<hljs error>final</hljs> class Foo
{
}
```


```php
class Bar <hljs striped>extends Foo</hljs>
{
}
```

Going even one step further: classes are only allowed to extend from abstract classes or implement interfaces.
This way we can prevent deep inheritance chains of concrete classes. 

## Void by default

Void is a strange thing when you think about it: it a "type", indicating the lack of a type.
Why not go with the obvious way: no return type, means nothing is returned.

```php
class Foo
{
    public function bar()<hljs error>: void</hljs>
    {
        // …
    }
}
```

```php
class Foo
{
    public function bar()
    {
        <hljs striped>return false;</hljs>
    }
}
```

Now you might be thinking: what if a function wants to return two types, that's the next point.

## No `mixed` type

The `mixed` type basically means: 
"you've got no idea what this function needs or will return, figure it out on your own".

Such a loose type system can be the source of many bugs. 
If you feel the need to use two different types in the same function, 
you should either make two implementations — this is where polymorphism has its place;
or you should program to an interface.

Either way, there's _always_ a better solution then relying on `mixed`. 
In my version of PHP, the language would ensure we always choose the better solution. 

## All parameters must by typed

We already established that my version of PHP would make return types required.
It's no surprise that the same goes for function parameters.

```php
public function handle(<hljs striped>$bar</hljs>)
{
}
``` 

```php
public function handle(<hljs type>Bar</hljs> $bar)
{
}
```

## Class properties must be typed

The same rules apply to class properties. 
Luckily for us, PHP 7.4 will introduce [typed properties](/blog/new-in-php-74#typed-properties-rfc).
I'd make them required though.

```php
class Foo
{
    <hljs striped>public <hljs prop>$bar</hljs>;</hljs>
}
```

```php
class Foo
{
    public <hljs type>Bar</hljs> <hljs prop>$bar</hljs>;
}
```

## Visibility modifiers are required

Explicitness eliminates room for confusion. 
That's why all methods and class variables must have a visibility modifier.

```php
class Foo
{
    <hljs striped>function bar()
    {
        // …
    }</hljs>
} 
```

```php
class Foo
{
    public function bar()
    {
        // …
    }
} 
```

## Final on variables

I started this list by saying I'd drop the `final` keyword, that is on classes and methods. 
`final` would be a valid keyword to mark class variables as "read only".

A final variable may be set on construct, and not be changed afterwards.

```php
class Foo
{
    public final <hljs type>Bar</hljs> <hljs prop>$bar</hljs>;
    
    public <hljs prop>__construct</hljs>(<hljs type>Bar</hljs> $bar)
    {
        $this-><hljs prop>bar</hljs> = $bar;
    }
}
```

```php
$foo = new <hljs type>Foo</hljs>($bar);

<hljs striped>$foo->bar = new Bar();</hljs>
```

## No more uninitialized state

Right now, [Typed properties](/blog/typed-properties-in-php-74) be uninitialized after construction. This is valid PHP

```php
class Foo
{
    public <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$bar</hljs>;
    
    public function __construct() {
        // Don't initialize bar
    }
}

$foo = new <hljs type>Foo</hljs>();

$foo-><hljs prop>bar</hljs> = 'abc';
```

PHP only throws an error when the property is accessed before it's initialised.

```php
$foo = new <hljs type>Foo</hljs>();

echo $foo-><hljs prop>bar</hljs>; // Error
```

I'd say to get rid rid of this behaviour. If a typed property isn't initialised after the object was constructed, you get an error.

{{ cta:mail }}

## Named parameters

Named parameters were originally on this list, but fortunately are [possible as of PHP 8](/blog/php-8-named-arguments)!

## Better closures

I originally listed "multiline short closures" here, but I think it's a little bit more complex. What I'd like to see is a combination of `function/fn` and `=>/{`. I'd make all combinations possible:

```php
function a() {
    return /* … */;
}

function b() => 1;

<hljs keyword>fn</hljs> <hljs prop>c</hljs>() {
    return /* … */;
}

<hljs keyword>fn</hljs> <hljs prop>d</hljs>() => 1;
```

Here's the difference: when using the `<hljs keyword>function</hljs>` keyword, there's no automatic access to the outer scope, in other words you'll have to use `<hljs keyword>use</hljs>` to access variables outside the closure. Using `<hljs keyword>fn</hljs>` doesn't have this restriction.

If you're using the bracket notation for the closure's body `{}`, you'll be allowed to write multiline functions, but there's no magic return statement. `=>` on the other hand only allows a single expression, which is immediately returned.

## Scalar types are also objects

One of the few things I think that we're all in agreement about: 
the current PHP function names and definitions are inconsistent and kind of sucky.

Let's treat all scalar types as objects, 
allowing them to contain what otherwise would be standalone functions.

```php
public function handle(): string
{
    return "a, b, c";
}

$this-><hljs prop>handle</hljs>()<hljs >-><hljs prop>explode</hljs>(',')</hljs>;
```

## Improved variance

You may have noticed a trend in the above changes. 
Most of them relate to PHP's type system.
If all them were added, we'd also need to make the current type system more flexible.

Luckily again, PHP 7.4 already introduces [improvements regarding type variance](/blog/new-in-php-74#improved-type-variance-rfc).

```php
class Bar extends Foo { /* … */ }
```

```php
interface A
{
    public function handle(<hljs type>Bar</hljs> $bar): Foo;
}

class B implements A
{
    public function handle(<hljs type>Foo</hljs> $bar): <hljs type>Bar</hljs>
    {
        // …
    }
}
```

## Always strict type checking

Strict type checking is done by default, you should never `declare(strict_types=1);` anymore.

## Generics

After several improvements to the type system, I'd add some more improved ways to actually use it.

First a feature that probably most of the PHP world is waiting for: generics.  

```php
class List<<hljs type>T</hljs>>
{
    public function current(): T
    {
        // …
    }
}
```

## Enums

Next up: built-in enums. 
Based on the [several](*https://github.com/myclabs/php-enum) [userland](*https://github.com/marc-mabe/php-enum)
[implementations](*https://github.com/spatie/enum) 
it's clear that the community would benefit from a built-in enum type.

```php
<hljs keyword>enum</hljs> <hljs type>Status</hljs> 
{
    <hljs prop>DRAFT</hljs>, <hljs prop>STATUS</hljs>, <hljs prop>PUBLISHED</hljs>;
}
```

```php
class Bar
{
    public <hljs type>Status</hljs> $status;
}
```

```php
$bar->status = <hljs type>Status</hljs>::<hljs prop>DRAFT</hljs>;
```

It's interesting to note that a new RFC [popped up](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/enumerations_and_adts) that might add enums in PHP 8.1. It's still being discussed though, so nothing concrete yet.

## Structs

To end this list: structs. 
One of my own packages I use all the time is the [data transfer object](*https://github.com/spatie/data-transfer-object) package.
It allows us to define strongly typed objects.
In essence, they are a userland implementation of what structs are meant to solve.

```php
<hljs keyword>struct</hljs> <hljs type>Point</hljs> {
    <hljs type>int</hljs> $x;
    <hljs type>int</hljs> $y;
}
```

```php
$point = <hljs type>Point</hljs> {1, 2}
```

## What would you like to change?

Let me know [what's on your PHP wishlist](*https://twitter.com/brendt_gd)! If you want to be kept in the loop, feel free to subscribe to [my newsletter](http://stitcher.io.test/newsletter/subscribe). 
