src/content/blog/2020-01-16-new-in-php-8.md, before:

PHP 8, the new major PHP version, is expected to be released by the end of 2020. It's in very active development right now, so things are likely to change a lot in the upcoming months.

In this post I'll keep an up-to-date list of what's expected to come: new features, performance improvements and breaking changes. Because PHP 8 is a new major version, there's a higher chance of your code breaking. If you've kept up to date with the latest releases though, the upgrade shouldn't be too hard, since most breaking changes were deprecated before in the 7.* versions.

Besides breaking changes, PHP 8 also brings some nice new features such as [the JIT compiler](#jit-rfc) and [union types](#union-types-rfc); and there's more to come!

{{ ad:carbon }}

## New features

Starting with new features, remember that PHP 8 is still in active development, so this list will grow over time.

### Union types <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/union_types_v2)</small>

Given the dynamically typed nature of PHP, there are lots of cases where union types can be useful. Union types are a collection of two or more types which indicate that either one of those can be used.

```php
public function foo(<hljs type>Foo|Bar</hljs> $input): <hljs type>int|float</hljs>;
```

Note that `void` can never be part of a union type, since it indicates "no return value at all". Furthermore, `nullable` unions can be written using `|null`, or by using the existing `?` notation:

```php
public function foo(<hljs type>Foo|null</hljs> $foo): void;

public function bar(<hljs type>?Bar</hljs> $bar): void;
```

### JIT <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/jit)</small>

The JIT — just in time — compiler promises significant performance improvements, albeit not always within the context of web requests. There haven't been any accurate benchmarks done at this point, but they sure will come.

If you want to know more about what the JIT can do for PHP, you can read another post I wrote about it [here](*/blog/php-jit).

### Static return type <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/static_return_type)</small>

While it was already possible to return `self`, `static` wasn't a valid return type until PHP 8. Given PHP's dynamically typed nature, it's a feature that will be useful to many developers.

```php
class Foo
{
    public function test(): static
    {
        return new static();
    }
}
```

### Throw expression <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/throw_expression)</small>

This RFC changes `throw` from being a statement to being an expression, which makes it possible to throw exception in many new places:

```php
$triggerError = <hljs keyword>fn</hljs> () => throw new <hljs type>MyError</hljs>();

$foo = $bar['offset'] ?? throw new <hljs type>OffsetDoesNotExist</hljs>('offset');
```

### Weak maps <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/weak_maps)</small>

Built upon the [weakrefs RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/weakrefs) that was added in PHP 7.4, a `WeakMap` implementation is added in PHP 8. `WeakMaps` hold references to objects, which don't prevent those objects from being garbage collected.

Take the example of ORMs, they often implement caches which hold references to entity classes to improve the performance of relations between entities. These entity objects can not be garbage collected, as long as this cache has a reference to them, even if the cache is the _only_ thing referencing them.

If this caching layer uses weak references and maps instead, PHP will garbage collect these objects when nothing else references them anymore. Especially in the case of ORMs, which can manage several hundreds, if not thousands of entities within a request; weak maps can offer a better, more resource friendly way of dealing with these objects.

Here's what weak maps look like, an example from the RFC:

```php
class Foo 
{
    private <hljs type>WeakMap</hljs> $cache;
 
    public function getSomethingWithCaching(<hljs type>object</hljs> $obj): object
    {
        return $this->cache[$obj]
           ??= $this-><hljs prop>computeSomethingExpensive</hljs>($obj);
    }
}
```

### Allowing `::class` on objects <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/class_name_literal_on_object)</small>

A small, yet useful, new feature: it's now possible to use `::class` on objects, instead of having to use `get_class()` on them. It works the same way as `get_class()`.

```txt
$foo = <hljs keyword>new</hljs> <hljs type>Foo</hljs>();

<hljs prop>var_dump</hljs>($foo::<hljs keyword>class</hljs>);
```

### Create `DateTime` objects from interface

You can already create a `DateTime` object from a `DateTimeImmutable` object using `DateTime::createFromImmutable($immutableDateTime)`, but the other way around was tricky. By adding `DateTime::createFromInterface()` and `DatetimeImmutable::createFromInterface()` there's now a generalised way to convert `DateTime` and `DateTimeImmutable` objects to each other.

```php
<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromInterface</hljs>(<hljs type>DateTimeInterface</hljs> $other);

<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromInterface</hljs>(<hljs type>DateTimeInterface</hljs> $other);
``` 

### New `Stringable` interface <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/stringable)</small>

The `Stringable` interface can be used to type hint anything that is a string or implements `__toString()`. Furthermore, whenever a class implements `__toString()`, it automatically implements the interface behind the scenes and there's no need to manually implement it.

```php
class Foo
{
    public function __toString(): string
    {
        return 'foo';
    }
}

function bar(<hljs type>Stringable</hljs> $stringable) { /* … */ }

<hljs prop>bar</hljs>(new <hljs type>Foo</hljs>());
<hljs prop>bar</hljs>('abc');
```

### New `str_contains()` function <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/str_contains)</small>

Some might say it's long overdue, but we finally don't have to rely on `strpos` anymore to know whether a string contains another string.

Instead of doing this:

```php
if (<hljs prop>strpos</hljs>('string with lots of words', 'words') !== false) { /* … */ }
``` 

You can now do this

```php
if (<hljs prop>str_contains</hljs>('string with lots of words', 'words')) { /* … */ }
```

### New `fdiv()` function <small>[PR](*https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/4769)</small>

The new `fdiv()` function does something similar as the `fmod()` and `intdiv()` functions, which allows for division by 0. Instead of errors you'll get `INF`, `-INF` or `NAN`, depending on the case. 

### New `get_debug_type()` function <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/get_debug_type)</small>

`get_debug_type()` returns the type of a variable. Sounds like something `gettype()` would do? `get_debug_type()` returns more useful output for arrays, strings, anonymous classes and objects.

For example, calling `gettype()` on a class `\Foo\Bar` would return `object`. Using `get_debug_type()` will return the class name.

A full list of differences between `get_debug_type()` and `gettype()` can be found in the RFC.

### Abstract methods in traits improvements <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/abstract_trait_method_validation)</small>

Traits can specify abstract methods which must be implemented by the classes using them. There's a caveat though: before PHP 8 the signature of these method implementations weren't validated. The following was valid:

```php
trait <hljs type>Test</hljs> {
    abstract public function test(<hljs type>int</hljs> $input): int;
}

class UsesTrait
{
    use <hljs type>Test</hljs>;

    public function test($input)
    {
        return $input;
    }
}
```

PHP 8 will perform proper method signature validation when using a trait and implementing its abstract methods. This means you'll need to write this instead:

```php
class UsesTrait
{
    use <hljs type>Test</hljs>;

    public function test(<hljs type>int</hljs> $input): int
    {
        return $input;
    }
}
```

### Object implementation of `token_get_all()` <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/token_as_object)</small>

The `token_get_all()` function returns an array of values. This RFC adds a `PhpToken` class with a `PhpToken::getAll()` method. This implementation works with objects instead of plain values. It consumes less memory and is easier to read.

### Variable syntax tweaks <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/variable_syntax_tweaks)</small>

From the RFC: "the Uniform Variable Syntax RFC resolved a number of inconsistencies in PHP's variable syntax. This RFC intends to address a small handful of cases that were overlooked." 

### Type annotations for internal functions <small>[EXTERNALS](*https://externals.io/message/106522)</small>

Lots of people [pitched in](*https://github.com/php/php-src/pulls?q=is%3Apr+label%3AStubs+is%3Aclosed) to add proper type annotations to all internal functions. This was a long standing issue, and finally solvable with all the changes made to PHP in previous versions. This means that internal functions and methods will have complete type information in reflection.

## Breaking changes

As mentioned before: this is a major update and thus there will be breaking changes. The best thing to do is take a look at the full list of breaking changes over at the [UPGRADING](*https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING#L20) document.

Many of these breaking changes have been deprecated in previous 7.* versions though, so if you've been staying up-to-date over the years, it shouldn't be all that hard to upgrade to PHP 8.

### Consistent type errors <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/consistent_type_errors)</small>

User-defined functions in PHP will already throw `TypeErrors`, but internal functions did not, they rather emitted warnings and returned `null`. As of PHP 8 the behaviour of internal functions have been made consistent. 

### Reclassified engine warnings <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/engine_warnings)</small>

Lots of errors that previously only triggered warnings or notices, have been converted to proper errors. The following warnings were changed.

- Undefined variable: `Error` exception instead of notice
- Undefined array index: warning instead of notice
- Division by zero: `DivisionByZeroError` exception instead of warning
- Attempt to increment/decrement property '%s' of non-object: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Attempt to modify property '%s' of non-object: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Attempt to assign property '%s' of non-object: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Creating default object from empty value: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Trying to get property '%s' of non-object: warning instead of notice
- Undefined property: %s::$%s: warning instead of notice
- Cannot add element to the array as the next element is already occupied: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Cannot unset offset in a non-array variable: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Cannot use a scalar value as an array: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Only arrays and `Traversables` can be unpacked: `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Invalid argument supplied for foreach(): `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Illegal offset type: `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Illegal offset type in isset or empty: `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Illegal offset type in unset: `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Array to string conversion: warning instead of notice
- Resource ID#%d used as offset, casting to integer (%d): warning instead of notice
- String offset cast occurred: warning instead of notice
- Uninitialized string offset: %d: warning instead of notice
- Cannot assign an empty string to a string offset: `Error` exception instead of warning

### Default error reporting level

It's now `E_ALL` instead of everything but `E_NOTICE` and `E_DEPRECATED`. This means that many errors might pop up which were previously silently ignored, though probably already existent before PHP 8.

### The @ operator no longer silences fatal errors

It's possible that this change might reveal errors that again were hidden before PHP 8. Make sure to set `display_errors=Off` on your production servers!

### Concatenation precedence <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/concatenation_precedence)</small>

While already deprecated in PHP 7.4, this change is now taken into effect. If you'd write something like this:

```php
echo "sum: " . $a + $b;
```

PHP would previously interpret it like this:

```php
echo ("sum: " . $a) + $b;
```

PHP 8 will make it so that it's interpreted like this:

```php
echo "sum: " . ($a + $b);
```

### Reflection method signature changes

Three method signatures of reflection classes have been changed:

```php
<hljs type>ReflectionClass</hljs>::<hljs prop>newInstance</hljs>($args);
<hljs type>ReflectionFunction</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($args);
<hljs type>ReflectionMethod</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($object, $args);
```

Have now become:

```php
<hljs type>ReflectionClass</hljs>::<hljs prop>newInstance</hljs>(...$args);
<hljs type>ReflectionFunction</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>(...$args);
<hljs type>ReflectionMethod</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($object, ...$args);
```

The upgrading guide specifies that if you extend these classes, and still want to support both PHP 7 and PHP 8, the following signatures are allowed:

```php
<hljs type>ReflectionClass</hljs>::<hljs prop>newInstance</hljs>($arg = null, ...$args);
<hljs type>ReflectionFunction</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($arg = null, ...$args);
<hljs type>ReflectionMethod</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($object, $arg = null, ...$args);
```

### Several small deprecations

During the PHP 7.* development, several deprecations were added that are now finalised in PHP 8.

- Deprecations in [PHP 7.2](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecations_php_7_2)
- Deprecations in [PHP 7.3](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecations_php_7_3)
- Deprecations in [PHP 7.4](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecations_php_7_4)

Commit message:

Add invalid stream resource TypeError

src/content/blog/2020-01-16-new-in-php-8.md, after:

PHP 8, the new major PHP version, is expected to be released by the end of 2020. It's in very active development right now, so things are likely to change a lot in the upcoming months.

In this post I'll keep an up-to-date list of what's expected to come: new features, performance improvements and breaking changes. Because PHP 8 is a new major version, there's a higher chance of your code breaking. If you've kept up to date with the latest releases though, the upgrade shouldn't be too hard, since most breaking changes were deprecated before in the 7.* versions.

Besides breaking changes, PHP 8 also brings some nice new features such as [the JIT compiler](#jit-rfc) and [union types](#union-types-rfc); and there's more to come!

{{ ad:carbon }}

## New features

Starting with new features, remember that PHP 8 is still in active development, so this list will grow over time.

### Union types <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/union_types_v2)</small>

Given the dynamically typed nature of PHP, there are lots of cases where union types can be useful. Union types are a collection of two or more types which indicate that either one of those can be used.

```php
public function foo(<hljs type>Foo|Bar</hljs> $input): <hljs type>int|float</hljs>;
```

Note that `void` can never be part of a union type, since it indicates "no return value at all". Furthermore, `nullable` unions can be written using `|null`, or by using the existing `?` notation:

```php
public function foo(<hljs type>Foo|null</hljs> $foo): void;

public function bar(<hljs type>?Bar</hljs> $bar): void;
```

### JIT <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/jit)</small>

The JIT — just in time — compiler promises significant performance improvements, albeit not always within the context of web requests. There haven't been any accurate benchmarks done at this point, but they sure will come.

If you want to know more about what the JIT can do for PHP, you can read another post I wrote about it [here](*/blog/php-jit).

### Static return type <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/static_return_type)</small>

While it was already possible to return `self`, `static` wasn't a valid return type until PHP 8. Given PHP's dynamically typed nature, it's a feature that will be useful to many developers.

```php
class Foo
{
    public function test(): static
    {
        return new static();
    }
}
```

### Throw expression <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/throw_expression)</small>

This RFC changes `throw` from being a statement to being an expression, which makes it possible to throw exception in many new places:

```php
$triggerError = <hljs keyword>fn</hljs> () => throw new <hljs type>MyError</hljs>();

$foo = $bar['offset'] ?? throw new <hljs type>OffsetDoesNotExist</hljs>('offset');
```

### Weak maps <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/weak_maps)</small>

Built upon the [weakrefs RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/weakrefs) that was added in PHP 7.4, a `WeakMap` implementation is added in PHP 8. `WeakMaps` hold references to objects, which don't prevent those objects from being garbage collected.

Take the example of ORMs, they often implement caches which hold references to entity classes to improve the performance of relations between entities. These entity objects can not be garbage collected, as long as this cache has a reference to them, even if the cache is the _only_ thing referencing them.

If this caching layer uses weak references and maps instead, PHP will garbage collect these objects when nothing else references them anymore. Especially in the case of ORMs, which can manage several hundreds, if not thousands of entities within a request; weak maps can offer a better, more resource friendly way of dealing with these objects.

Here's what weak maps look like, an example from the RFC:

```php
class Foo 
{
    private <hljs type>WeakMap</hljs> $cache;
 
    public function getSomethingWithCaching(<hljs type>object</hljs> $obj): object
    {
        return $this->cache[$obj]
           ??= $this-><hljs prop>computeSomethingExpensive</hljs>($obj);
    }
}
```

### Allowing `::class` on objects <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/class_name_literal_on_object)</small>

A small, yet useful, new feature: it's now possible to use `::class` on objects, instead of having to use `get_class()` on them. It works the same way as `get_class()`.

```txt
$foo = <hljs keyword>new</hljs> <hljs type>Foo</hljs>();

<hljs prop>var_dump</hljs>($foo::<hljs keyword>class</hljs>);
```

### Create `DateTime` objects from interface

You can already create a `DateTime` object from a `DateTimeImmutable` object using `DateTime::createFromImmutable($immutableDateTime)`, but the other way around was tricky. By adding `DateTime::createFromInterface()` and `DatetimeImmutable::createFromInterface()` there's now a generalised way to convert `DateTime` and `DateTimeImmutable` objects to each other.

```php
<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromInterface</hljs>(<hljs type>DateTimeInterface</hljs> $other);

<hljs type>DateTimeImmutable</hljs>::<hljs prop>createFromInterface</hljs>(<hljs type>DateTimeInterface</hljs> $other);
``` 

### New `Stringable` interface <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/stringable)</small>

The `Stringable` interface can be used to type hint anything that is a string or implements `__toString()`. Furthermore, whenever a class implements `__toString()`, it automatically implements the interface behind the scenes and there's no need to manually implement it.

```php
class Foo
{
    public function __toString(): string
    {
        return 'foo';
    }
}

function bar(<hljs type>Stringable</hljs> $stringable) { /* … */ }

<hljs prop>bar</hljs>(new <hljs type>Foo</hljs>());
<hljs prop>bar</hljs>('abc');
```

### New `str_contains()` function <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/str_contains)</small>

Some might say it's long overdue, but we finally don't have to rely on `strpos` anymore to know whether a string contains another string.

Instead of doing this:

```php
if (<hljs prop>strpos</hljs>('string with lots of words', 'words') !== false) { /* … */ }
``` 

You can now do this

```php
if (<hljs prop>str_contains</hljs>('string with lots of words', 'words')) { /* … */ }
```

### New `fdiv()` function <small>[PR](*https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/4769)</small>

The new `fdiv()` function does something similar as the `fmod()` and `intdiv()` functions, which allows for division by 0. Instead of errors you'll get `INF`, `-INF` or `NAN`, depending on the case. 

### New `get_debug_type()` function <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/get_debug_type)</small>

`get_debug_type()` returns the type of a variable. Sounds like something `gettype()` would do? `get_debug_type()` returns more useful output for arrays, strings, anonymous classes and objects.

For example, calling `gettype()` on a class `\Foo\Bar` would return `object`. Using `get_debug_type()` will return the class name.

A full list of differences between `get_debug_type()` and `gettype()` can be found in the RFC.

### Abstract methods in traits improvements <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/abstract_trait_method_validation)</small>

Traits can specify abstract methods which must be implemented by the classes using them. There's a caveat though: before PHP 8 the signature of these method implementations weren't validated. The following was valid:

```php
trait <hljs type>Test</hljs> {
    abstract public function test(<hljs type>int</hljs> $input): int;
}

class UsesTrait
{
    use <hljs type>Test</hljs>;

    public function test($input)
    {
        return $input;
    }
}
```

PHP 8 will perform proper method signature validation when using a trait and implementing its abstract methods. This means you'll need to write this instead:

```php
class UsesTrait
{
    use <hljs type>Test</hljs>;

    public function test(<hljs type>int</hljs> $input): int
    {
        return $input;
    }
}
```

### Object implementation of `token_get_all()` <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/token_as_object)</small>

The `token_get_all()` function returns an array of values. This RFC adds a `PhpToken` class with a `PhpToken::getAll()` method. This implementation works with objects instead of plain values. It consumes less memory and is easier to read.

### Variable syntax tweaks <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/variable_syntax_tweaks)</small>

From the RFC: "the Uniform Variable Syntax RFC resolved a number of inconsistencies in PHP's variable syntax. This RFC intends to address a small handful of cases that were overlooked." 

### Type annotations for internal functions <small>[EXTERNALS](*https://externals.io/message/106522)</small>

Lots of people [pitched in](*https://github.com/php/php-src/pulls?q=is%3Apr+label%3AStubs+is%3Aclosed) to add proper type annotations to all internal functions. This was a long standing issue, and finally solvable with all the changes made to PHP in previous versions. This means that internal functions and methods will have complete type information in reflection.

## Breaking changes

As mentioned before: this is a major update and thus there will be breaking changes. The best thing to do is take a look at the full list of breaking changes over at the [UPGRADING](*https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING#L20) document.

Many of these breaking changes have been deprecated in previous 7.* versions though, so if you've been staying up-to-date over the years, it shouldn't be all that hard to upgrade to PHP 8.

### Consistent type errors <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/consistent_type_errors)</small>

User-defined functions in PHP will already throw `TypeErrors`, but internal functions did not, they rather emitted warnings and returned `null`. As of PHP 8 the behaviour of internal functions have been made consistent. 

### Reclassified engine warnings <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/engine_warnings)</small>

Lots of errors that previously only triggered warnings or notices, have been converted to proper errors. The following warnings were changed.

- Undefined variable: `Error` exception instead of notice
- Undefined array index: warning instead of notice
- Division by zero: `DivisionByZeroError` exception instead of warning
- Attempt to increment/decrement property '%s' of non-object: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Attempt to modify property '%s' of non-object: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Attempt to assign property '%s' of non-object: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Creating default object from empty value: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Trying to get property '%s' of non-object: warning instead of notice
- Undefined property: %s::$%s: warning instead of notice
- Cannot add element to the array as the next element is already occupied: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Cannot unset offset in a non-array variable: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Cannot use a scalar value as an array: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Only arrays and `Traversables` can be unpacked: `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Invalid argument supplied for foreach(): `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Illegal offset type: `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Illegal offset type in isset or empty: `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Illegal offset type in unset: `TypeError` exception instead of warning
- Array to string conversion: warning instead of notice
- Resource ID#%d used as offset, casting to integer (%d): warning instead of notice
- String offset cast occurred: warning instead of notice
- Uninitialized string offset: %d: warning instead of notice
- Cannot assign an empty string to a string offset: `Error` exception instead of warning
- Supplied resource is not a valid stream resource: `TypeError` exception instead of warning

### Default error reporting level

It's now `E_ALL` instead of everything but `E_NOTICE` and `E_DEPRECATED`. This means that many errors might pop up which were previously silently ignored, though probably already existent before PHP 8.

### The @ operator no longer silences fatal errors

It's possible that this change might reveal errors that again were hidden before PHP 8. Make sure to set `display_errors=Off` on your production servers!

### Concatenation precedence <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/concatenation_precedence)</small>

While already deprecated in PHP 7.4, this change is now taken into effect. If you'd write something like this:

```php
echo "sum: " . $a + $b;
```

PHP would previously interpret it like this:

```php
echo ("sum: " . $a) + $b;
```

PHP 8 will make it so that it's interpreted like this:

```php
echo "sum: " . ($a + $b);
```

### Reflection method signature changes

Three method signatures of reflection classes have been changed:

```php
<hljs type>ReflectionClass</hljs>::<hljs prop>newInstance</hljs>($args);
<hljs type>ReflectionFunction</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($args);
<hljs type>ReflectionMethod</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($object, $args);
```

Have now become:

```php
<hljs type>ReflectionClass</hljs>::<hljs prop>newInstance</hljs>(...$args);
<hljs type>ReflectionFunction</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>(...$args);
<hljs type>ReflectionMethod</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($object, ...$args);
```

The upgrading guide specifies that if you extend these classes, and still want to support both PHP 7 and PHP 8, the following signatures are allowed:

```php
<hljs type>ReflectionClass</hljs>::<hljs prop>newInstance</hljs>($arg = null, ...$args);
<hljs type>ReflectionFunction</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($arg = null, ...$args);
<hljs type>ReflectionMethod</hljs>::<hljs prop>invoke</hljs>($object, $arg = null, ...$args);
```

### Several small deprecations

During the PHP 7.* development, several deprecations were added that are now finalised in PHP 8.

- Deprecations in [PHP 7.2](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecations_php_7_2)
- Deprecations in [PHP 7.3](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecations_php_7_3)
- Deprecations in [PHP 7.4](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecations_php_7_4)
