PHP 8.1 is currently in active development and will probably be released somewhere around the end of November 2021. We already know about new features, performance improvements, changes and deprecations; so let's go through them one by one.

## New features

As with every release, PHP 8.1 adds some nice new features. Keep in mind that this list will grow over the year. I'm also listing features that haven't been implemented yet but that make a good chance of ending up in the language. I'll make sure to always mark those features.

---

### Enums <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/enumerations)</small>

Enums will be added in PHP 8.1! If you're unsure what they can be used for, you can read about them [here](*/blog/php-enums).

Adding enums would be a significant improvement in PHP, so I for one am very much looking forward seeing enums arrive in PHP 8.1. To give you a quick preview of what they will look like, here's a code sample:

```php
<hljs keyword>enum</hljs> <hljs type>Status</hljs> {
  <hljs keyword>case</hljs> <hljs prop>Pending</hljs>;
  <hljs keyword>case</hljs> <hljs prop>Active</hljs>;
  <hljs keyword>case</hljs> <hljs prop>Archived</hljs>;
}
```

And this is how they will be used:

```php
class Post
{
    public function __construct(
        <hljs keyword>private</hljs> <hljs type>Status</hljs> <hljs prop>$status</hljs> = <hljs type>Status</hljs>::<hljs prop>Pending</hljs>;
    ) {}

    public function setStatus(<hljs type>Status</hljs> $status): void
    {
        // …
    }
}

$post-><hljs prop>setStatus</hljs>(<hljs type>Status</hljs>::<hljs prop>Active</hljs>);
```

You can find an in-depth analysis of how to use enums in [this post](/blog/php-enums).

---

### Performance improvements <small>[PR](*https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6627)</small>

Dmitry Stogov has added some improvements to opcache, he calls it "[inheritance cache](*https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/6627)". This feature allows links between classes to be cached, much like linked classes can be [preloaded](*/blog/preloading-in-php-74) as of PHP 7.4.

Dmitry reports between a 5% and 8% performance increase thanks to this change, a nice little detail to look out for in PHP 8.1.

{{ ad:carbon }}

---

### Array unpacking with string keys <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/array_unpacking_string_keys)</small>

Array unpacking was already allowed in [PHP 7.4](/blog/new-in-php-74), but it only worked with numeric keys. The reason string keys weren't supported before is because there wasn't any consensus on how to merge array duplicates. The RFC cleanly solves this by following the semantics of `<hljs prop>array_merge</hljs>`:

```php
$array1 = ["a" => 1];

$array2 = ["b" => 2];

$array = ["a" => 0, ...$array1, ...$array2];

<hljs prop>var_dump</hljs>($array); // ["a" => 1, "b" => 2]
```

---

### New `<hljs prop>array_is_list</hljs>` function <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/is_list)</small>

You've probably had to deal with this once in a while: determine if an array's keys are in numerical order, starting from index 0. Just like `<hljs prop>json_encode</hljs>` decides whether an array should be encoded as an array or object.

PHP 8.1 adds a built-in function to determine whether an array is a list with those semantics, or not:

```php
$list = ["a", "b", "c"];

<hljs prop>array_is_list</hljs>($list); // true

$notAList = [1 => "a", 2 => "b", 3 => "c"];

<hljs prop>array_is_list</hljs>($notAList); // false

$alsoNotAList = ["a" => "a", "b" => "b", "c" => "c"];

<hljs prop>array_is_list</hljs>($alsoNotAList); // false
```

{{ cta:81 }}

---

### Explicit octal integer literal notation <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/explicit_octal_notation)</small>

You can now use `0o` and `0O` to denote octal numbers. The previous notation by prefixing a number with `0` still works as well. 

```php
016 === 0o16; // true
016 === 0O16; // true
```

## Breaking changes

While PHP 8.1 is a minor version, there will be some changes that might technically be a breaking change, and deprecations as well. Let's discuss them one by one.

---

### Restrict `$GLOBALS` usage <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/restrict_globals_usage)</small>

A small change to how `$GLOBALS` is used will have a significant impact on the performance of all array operations. Nikita does a fine job explaining the problem and solution in the [RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/restrict_globals_usage). The change means that some edge cases aren't possible to do any more with `$GLOBALS`. "_What is no longer supported are writes to $GLOBALS taken as a whole. All the following will generate a compile-time error_":

```php
$GLOBALS = [];
$GLOBALS += [];
$GLOBALS =& $x;
$x =& $GLOBALS;
unset($GLOBALS);
```

On top of that, passing `$GLOBALS` by reference will generate a runtime error:

```php
<hljs prop>by_ref</hljs>($GLOBALS); // Run-time error
```

Nikita analysed the top 2000 packages on Packagist, and only found 23 cases that will be affected by this change. We can conclude the impact of this — technically breaking — change will be low, which is why internals decided to add it in PHP 8.1. Remember that most of us will win by this change, given the positive performance impact it has everywhere in our code.

---

### Resource to object migrations

These changes are part of the long-term vision to convert all resources to dedicated objects. You can read more about it [here](*https://github.com/php/php-tasks/issues/6).

**Fileinfo functions with `<hljs type>finfo</hljs>` objects**

Functions like `<hljs prop>finfo_file</hljs>` and `<hljs prop>finfo_open</hljs>` used to accept and return resources. As of PHP 8.1, they work with [`<hljs type>finfo</hljs>`](*https://www.php.net/manual/en/class.finfo.php) objects.

**IMAP functions with `<hljs type>IMAPConnection</hljs>` objects**

Just like the fileinfo change, IMAP functions like `<hljs prop>imap_body</hljs>` and `<hljs prop>imap_open</hljs>` no longer work with resources

---

### Deprecate passing null to non-nullable arguments of internal functions <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate_null_to_scalar_internal_arg)</small>

This change is simple: internal functions currently accept `null` for arguments that are non-nullable, this RFC deprecates that behaviour. For example, this is currently possible:

```php
<hljs prop>str_contains</hljs>("string", <hljs striped>null</hljs>);
```

In PHP 8.1, these kinds of errors will throw a deprecation warning, in PHP 9 they will be converted to type errors.

---

### Other small changes

With every release, there's a bunch of very minor changes to the language. All of them are listed in the [UPGRADING](*https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING) guide on GitHub, make sure to check it out if you want to know every little detail.

Here's a summary of the most significant changes:

- `<hljs prop>MYSQLI_STMT_ATTR_UPDATE_MAX_LENGTH</hljs>` no longer has an effect
- `<hljs prop>MYSQLI_STORE_RESULT_COPY_DATA</hljs>` no longer has an effect
- <hljs type>PDO</hljs>::<hljs prop>ATTR_STRINGIFY_FETCHES</hljs> now also works with booleans
- Integers and floats in PDO MySQL and Sqlite result sets will be returned using native PHP types instead of strings when using emulated prepared statements
- Functions like `<hljs prop>htmlspecialchars</hljs>` and `<hljs prop>htmlentities</hljs>` now also escape `'` by default to `&amp;#039;`; malformed UTF-8 will also by replaced with a unicode character, instead of resulting in an empty string
- The `<hljs prop>hash</hljs>`, `<hljs prop>hash_file</hljs>` and `<hljs prop>hash_init</hljs>` have an extra argument added to them called `$options`, it has a default value of `[]` so it won't affect your code
- New support for `MurmurHash3` and `xxHash`

---

That's it for now, keep in mind I'll regularly update this post during the year, so make sure to [subscribe](/newsletter/subscribe) if you want to be kept in the loop. Are you excited for PHP 8.1? Let me know on [Twitter](*https://twitter.com/brendt_gd)!

{{ cta:mail }}
