PHP 8.2 will be released on [November 24, 2022](https://wiki.php.net/todo/php82). In this post, we'll go through all features, performance improvements, changes and deprecations one by one.

### `<hljs type>null</hljs>` and `<hljs type>false</hljs>` as standalone types <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/null-false-standalone-types)</small>

We'll avoid going down the rabbit hole of [type safety](/blog/liskov-and-type-safety) in this post, but technically `<hljs type>null</hljs>` and `<hljs type>false</hljs>` could be considered valid types on their own. Common examples are PHP's built-in functions, where `<hljs type>false</hljs>` is used as the return type for when an error occurs. For example in `<hljs prop>file_get_contents</hljs>`:

```php
<hljs prop>file_get_contents</hljs>(/* … */): <hljs type>string|false</hljs>
```

Note that using `<hljs type>false</hljs>` in a union type was already possible; but in PHP 8.2, it can be used as a standalone type as well:

```php
function alwaysFalse(): <hljs type>false</hljs>
{
    return false;
}
```

Many developers, including myself, are a bit wary looking at this RFC. It doesn't support `<hljs type>true</hljs>` as a standalone type, and shouldn't types represent categories instead of individual values? It turns out there is a concept called [a unit type](*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unit_type) in type systems, which are types that only allow one value. But is it really useful, and does it encourage clean software design? Maybe, maybe not.

A standalone `<hljs type>null</hljs>` type makes a bit more sense: as `<hljs type>null</hljs>` can be considered a category on itself and not just a value within a category. Imagine the null object pattern:

```php
class Post 
{
    public function getAuthor(): ?string { /* … */ }
}

class NullPost extends Post
{
    public function getAuthor(): null { /* … */ }
}
```

It makes sense for `<hljs type>NullPost</hljs>::<hljs prop>getAuthor</hljs>()` to be able to say it will only ever return `<hljs type>null</hljs>`, instead of `<hljs type>null</hljs>` or `<hljs type>string</hljs>`, which previously wasn't possible to do.

Personally, I'd stay away from using `<hljs type>false</hljs>` as a standalone type for conveying error state — I think there are better solutions to solving such problems. I can see some use cases for `<hljs type>null</hljs>` as a standalone type and I'll probably use it sporadically.

---

### Readonly classes <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/readonly_classes)</small>

Readonly properties were [introduced in PHP 8.1](/blog/php-81-readonly-properties). This RFC builds on top of them, and adds syntactic sugar to make all class properties readonly at once. Instead of writing this:

```php
class Post
{
    public function __construct(
        <hljs keyword>public readonly</hljs> <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$title</hljs>, 
        <hljs keyword>public readonly</hljs> <hljs type>Author</hljs> <hljs prop>$author</hljs>,
        <hljs keyword>public readonly</hljs> <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$body</hljs>,
        <hljs keyword>public readonly</hljs> <hljs type>DateTime</hljs> <hljs prop>$publishedAt</hljs>,
    ) {}
}
```

You can now write this:

```php
<hljs keyword yellow>readonly</hljs> class Post
{
    public function __construct(
        <hljs keyword>public</hljs> <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$title</hljs>, 
        <hljs keyword>public</hljs> <hljs type>Author</hljs> <hljs prop>$author</hljs>,
        <hljs keyword>public</hljs> <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$body</hljs>,
        <hljs keyword>public</hljs> <hljs type>DateTime</hljs> <hljs prop>$publishedAt</hljs>,
    ) {}
}
```

Functionally, making a class readonly is entirely the same as making every property readonly; but it will also prevent dynamic properties being added on a class:

```php
$post = new <hljs type>Post</hljs>(/* … */);

$post-><hljs striped>unknown</hljs> = 'wrong';

<hljs red full>Uncaught Error: Cannot create dynamic property Post::$unknown</hljs>
```

---

### Deprecate dynamic properties <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate_dynamic_properties)</small>

Speaking of dynamic properties: I'd say this is a change for the better, but it will hurt a little bit. Dynamic properties are deprecated in PHP 8.2, and will throw an `<hljs type>ErrorException</hljs>` in PHP 9.0. What are dynamic properties, you ask? Those are properties that aren't present on an object, but are set or get nevertheless:

```php
class Post
{
    public <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$title</hljs>;
}

// …

$post-><hljs striped>name</hljs> = 'Name';
```

Keep in mind that classes implementing `<hljs prop>__get</hljs>` and `<hljs prop>__set</hljs>` will still work as intended:

```php
class Post
{
    private <hljs type>array</hljs> <hljs prop>$properties</hljs> = [];
    
    public function __set(<hljs type>string</hljs> $name, <hljs type>mixed</hljs> $value): void
    {
        $this-><hljs prop>properties</hljs>[$name] = $value;
    }
}

// …

$post-><hljs prop>name</hljs> = 'Name';
```

The same goes for objects of `<hljs type>stdClass</hljs>`, they will keep supporting dynamic properties.

PHP used to be a very dynamic language, but has been moving away from that mindset for a while now. Personally I think it's a good thing to embrace stricter rules and rely on static analysis wherever possible, as I think it allows developers to write better code.

Still, I can imagine developers who relied on dynamic properties not being happy with this change; maybe it would help to take a deeper look into the benefits of static analysis? You can check out my [Road to PHP: Static Analysis](https://road-to-php.com/static) series if you want to learn more!

And _just in case_ you don't want these warnings when upgrading to PHP 8.2, there's a couple things you can do.

You can use the `#[<hljs type>AllowDynamicProperties</hljs>]` attribute on classes that should still allow those properties:

```php
#[<hljs type>AllowDynamicProperties</hljs>]
class Post
{
    public <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$title</hljs>;
}

// …

$post->name = 'Name'; // All fine
```

Another option is to simply disable deprecation warnings. I wouldn't recommend doing that, since you'll get in trouble with PHP 9.0, but here's how you can disable deprecation warnings in PHP anyway:

```php
<hljs prop>error_reporting</hljs>(<hljs prop>E_ALL</hljs> ^ <hljs prop>E_DEPRECATED</hljs>);
```

{{ cta:dynamic }}

### Redact parameters in back traces <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/redact_parameters_in_back_traces)</small>

A common practice in any codebase is to send production errors to a service that keeps track of them, and will notify developers when something goes wrong. This practice often involves sending stack traces over the wire to a third party service. There are case however where those stack traces can include sensitive information such as environment variables, passwords or usernames. 

PHP 8.2 allows you to mark such "sensitive parameters" with an attribute, so that you don't need to worry about them being listed in your stack traces when something goes wrong.
Here's an example from the RFC:

```php
function test(
    $foo,
    #[<hljs type>\SensitiveParameter</hljs>] $bar,
    $baz
) {
    throw new <hljs type>Exception</hljs>('Error');
}
 
<hljs prop>test</hljs>('foo', 'bar', 'baz');
 
<hljs error full>Fatal error: Uncaught Exception: Error in test.php:8
Stack trace:
#0 test.php(11): test('foo', <hljs yellow>Object(SensitiveParameterValue)</hljs>, 'baz')
#1 {main}
  thrown in test.php on line 8</hljs>
```


---

### Deprecate ${} string interpolation <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate_dollar_brace_string_interpolation)</small>

PHP has several ways of embedding variables in strings. This RFC deprecates two ways of doing so, since they are rarely used, and often lead to confusion:

```php
"Hello <hljs striped>${world}</hljs>";
<hljs red full>Deprecated: Using ${} in strings is deprecated</hljs>
 
"Hello <hljs striped>${(<hljs prop>world</hljs>)}</hljs>";
<hljs red full>Deprecated: Using ${} (variable variables) in strings is deprecated</hljs>
```

To be clear: the two popular ways of string interpolation still work:

```php
"Hello {$world}";
"Hello $world";
```

---


### Deprecate partially supported callables <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate_partially_supported_callables)</small>

Another change, although one with a slightly smaller impact, is that partially supported callables are now deprecated as well. Partially supported callables are callables which can be called using `<hljs prop>call_user_func</hljs>($callable)`, but not by calling `$callable()` directly. The list of these kinds of callables is rather short, by the way:

```php
"self::method"
"parent::method"
"static::method"
["self", "method"]
["parent", "method"]
["static", "method"]
["Foo", "Bar::method"]
[<hljs keyword>new</hljs> <hljs type>Foo</hljs>, "Bar::method"]
```

The reason for doing this? It's a step in the right direction towards being able to use `<hljs type>callable</hljs>` for typed properties. Nikita explains it very well in the RFC:

> all of these callables are context-dependent. The method that "self::method" refers to depends on which class the call or callability check is performed from. In practice, this usually also holds for the last two cases, when used in the form of [new Foo, "parent::method"].
>
> Reducing the context-dependence of callables is the secondary goal of this RFC. After this RFC, the only scope-dependence still left is method visibility: "Foo::bar" may be visible in one scope, but not another. If callables were to be limited to public methods in the future (while private methods would have to use first-class callables or Closure::fromCallable() to be made scope-independent), then the callable type would become well-defined and could be used as a property type. However, changes to visibility handling are not proposed as part of this RFC.


---

### Locale-independent case conversion <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/strtolower-ascii)</small>

Some changes to how case-conversion works, now not depending on locale anymore.

---

That's all there is for now, I'll keep this list updated throughout the year. You can subscribe to [my newsletter](/mail) if you want to receive occasional updates!

{{ cta:mail }}
