
<div class="sidenote">

**PHP 8.3 will be released on [November 23, 2023](https://wiki.php.net/todo/php83)**; it has improvements to readonly classes, the new `<hljs prop>json_validate</hljs>()` function, additions to the recently added `<hljs type>Randomizer</hljs>` class, stack overflow detection, and more. 

In this post, we'll go through all features, performance improvements, changes and deprecations one by one. If you want to stay up to date, you can [subscribe to my newsletter](/mail), [follow me on Twitter](/twitter), or [subscribe to my RSS feed](/rss).

</div>

{{ ad:carbon }}

### Readonly amendments <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/readonly_amendments)</small>

This RFC proposed two changes, only one was accepted: being able to reinitialize readonly properties while cloning. That might sound like a very big deal, but this RFC only addresses a very specific (but important) edge case: overwriting property values within `<hljs prop>__clone</hljs>()`, in order to allow deep cloning readonly properties. 

```php
<hljs keyword>readonly</hljs> class Post
{
    public function __construct(
        <hljs keyword>public</hljs> <hljs type>DateTime</hljs> <hljs prop>$createdAt</hljs>,
    ) {}
    
    public function __clone()
    {
        $this-><hljs prop>createdAt</hljs> = new <hljs type>DateTime</hljs>(); 
        // This is allowed,
        // even though `createdAt` is a readonly property.
    }
}
```

You can read an in-depth post about this RFC and some sidenotes [here](/blog/cloning-readonly-properties-in-php-83).

---

### Anonymous readonly classes <small>[UPGRADING](*https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING#L48)</small>

Previously, you weren't able to mark anonymous classes as readonly. That's fixed in PHP 8.3:

```php
$class = new <hljs keyword>readonly</hljs> class {
    public function __construct(
        <hljs keyword>public</hljs> <hljs type>string</hljs> <hljs prop>$foo</hljs> = 'bar',
    ) {}
};
```

---

### The new `<hljs prop>json_validate</hljs>()` function <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/json_validate)</small>

Previously, the only way to validate whether a string was valid JSON, was to decode it and detect whether any errors were thrown. This new `<hljs prop>json_validate</hljs>()` function is beneficial if you only need to know whether the input is valid JSON, since it uses less memory compared to decoding the string.

```php
<hljs prop>json_validate</hljs>(<hljs type>string</hljs> $json, <hljs type>int</hljs> $depth = 512, <hljs type>int</hljs> $flags = 0): <hljs type>bool</hljs>
```

---

### `<hljs type>Randomizer</hljs>` additions <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/randomizer_additions)</small>

PHP 8.2 added the new [Randomizer](/blog/new-in-php-82#new-random-extension-rfc) class. This update brings some small additions:

```php
<hljs type>Randomizer</hljs>::<hljs prop>getBytesFromString</hljs>(<hljs type>string</hljs> $string, <hljs type>int</hljs> $length): <hljs type>string</hljs>
```

This method allows you to generate a string with a given length that consists of randomly selected bytes from a given string.


```php
<hljs type>Randomizer</hljs>::<hljs prop>getFloat</hljs>(
    <hljs type>float</hljs> $min,
    <hljs type>float</hljs> $max,
    <hljs type>IntervalBoundary</hljs> $boundary = <hljs type>IntervalBoundary</hljs>::<hljs prop>ClosedOpen</hljs>
): <hljs type>float</hljs>
```

`<hljs prop>getFloat</hljs>()` returns a float between `$min` and `$max`. You can define whether `$min` and `$max` should be included thanks to the `<hljs type>IntervalBoundary</hljs>` enum. `<hljs prop>Closed</hljs>` means the value is included, while `<hljs prop>Open</hljs>` means excluded.

```php
<hljs type>Randomizer</hljs>::<hljs prop>nextFloat</hljs>(): <hljs type>float</hljs> {}
```

Finally, `<hljs prop>nextFloat</hljs>()` is a shorthand for `<hljs prop>getFloat</hljs>(0, 1, <hljs type>IntervalBoundary</hljs>::<hljs prop>ClosedOpen</hljs>)`, in other words: it'll give you a random float between 0 and 1, where 1 is excluded.

---

### Dynamic class constant fetch <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/dynamic_class_constant_fetch)</small>

PHP 8.3 allows you to fetch constants with a more dynamic syntax:

```php
class Foo 
{
    const <hljs prop>BAR</hljs> = 'bar';
}

$name = 'BAR';
 
// Instead of this:
<hljs prop>constant</hljs>(<hljs type>Foo</hljs>::class . '::' . $name);

// You can now do this:
<hljs type>Foo</hljs>::{$name};
```

---

### More Appropriate Date/Time Exceptions <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/datetime-exceptions)</small> <small class="breaking">[breaking](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/datetime-exceptions#backward_incompatible_changes)</small>

In many cases, PHP would simply throw an `<hljs type>Exception</hljs>` or `<hljs type>Error</hljs>` object; or emit a warning or error when something went wrong in dealing with dates and times. This RFC goes through all those edge cases and adds proper, dedicated exceptions for them.

We now have exceptions like `<hljs type>DateMalformedIntervalStringException</hljs>`, `<hljs type>DateInvalidOperationException</hljs>`, and `<hljs type>DateRangeError</hljs>`.

In general, these additions won't break any code, since these newly added exceptions and errors subclass the generic `<hljs type>Exception</hljs>` and `<hljs type>Error</hljs>` classes. However, there are three small breaking changes that come with this RFC:

- The `Epoch doesn't fit in a PHP integer` now returns a new `<hljs type>DateRangeError</hljs>` instead of a generic `<hljs type>ValueError</hljs>`, which it does not subclass. This is only an issue for 32-bit platforms.
- The `Only non-special relative time specifications are supported for subtraction` warning with `<hljs type>DateTime</hljs>::<hljs prop>sub</hljs>()` and `<hljs prop>date_sub</hljs>()` becomes a new `<hljs type>DateInvalidOperationException</hljs>`.
- The `Unknown or bad format (%s) at position %d (%c): %s` and `String '%s' contains non-relative elements` warnings that are created while parsing wrong/broken `<hljs type>DateInterval</hljs>` strings will now throw a new `<hljs type>DateMalformedIntervalStringException</hljs>` when used with the OO interface, instead of showing a warning and returning false.

---

### Improved `<hljs prop>unserialize</hljs>()` error handling <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/improve_unserialize_error_handling)</small>

`<hljs prop>unserialize</hljs>()` will now always emit a `<hljs prop>E_WARNING</hljs>` when running into problems instead of sometimes an `<hljs prop>E_NOTICE</hljs>`.

This RFC also proposed adding more exceptions when running `<hljs prop>unserialize</hljs>()`, but that part didn't get accepted.

---

### Stack overflow detection <small>[PR](*https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/9104)</small>

PHP 8.3 adds two new ini directives called `<hljs prop>zend.max_allowed_stack_size</hljs>` and `<hljs prop>zend.reserved_stack_size</hljs>`. Programs that are close to overflowing the call stack may now throw an <hljs type>Error</hljs> when using more than the difference between `<hljs prop>zend.max_allowed_stack_size</hljs>` and `<hljs prop>zend.reserved_stack_size</hljs>`.

The benefit of this feature is that stack-overflow-induced segmentation faults won't result in segfaults anymore, making debugging a lot easier. 

The default for `<hljs prop>zend.max_allowed_stack_size</hljs>` is `0`, meaning PHP will automatically determine a value. You can also provide `-1` to indicate there isn't a limit, or a specific number of bytes. The `<hljs prop>zend.reserved_stack_size</hljs>` directive is used to determine the "buffer zone", so that PHP is able to still throw an error instead of actually running out of memory. The value here should be a number of bytes, but PHP will determine a reasonable default for you, so you don't necessarily need to set it, unless you're running into edge cases for specific programs.

On a final note, for fibers, the existing `<hljs prop>fiber.stack_size</hljs>` directive is used as the max allowed stack size.

```ini
<hljs prop>zend.max_allowed_stack_size</hljs>=128K
```

---

### Small, but notable changes

Not every change in PHP passes the RFC process. In fact, the majority of changes include maintenance and bugfixing, and don't require an RFC. All of these changes are listed in the [UPGRADING](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING) document. I'll list some of the most prominent ones, but you should definitely read throughout the whole list if you want to know about the tiniest details.

- When using [FFI](/blog/new-in-php-74#foreign-function-interface-rfc), C functions that have a return type of `<hljs type>void</hljs>` now return `<hljs keyword>null</hljs>` instead of returning `<hljs type>FFI\CData</hljs>:<hljs prop>void</hljs>`
- `<hljs prop>posix_getrlimit</hljs>()` now takes an optional `$res` parameter to allow fetching a single resource limit.
- `<hljs prop>gc_status</hljs>()` has four new fields: `running`, `protected`, `full`, and `buffer_size`.
- `<hljs prop>class_alias</hljs>()` now supports creating an alias of an internal class.
- `<hljs prop>mysqli_poll</hljs>()` now raises a `<hljs type>ValueError</hljs>` when the read nor error arguments are passed.
- `<hljs prop>array_pad</hljs>()` is now only limited by the maximum number of elements an array can have. Before, it was only possible to add at most 1048576 elements at a time.
- New posix functions: `<hljs prop>posix_sysconf</hljs>()`, `<hljs prop>posix_pathconf</hljs>()`, `<hljs prop>posix_fpathconf</hljs>()`, and `<hljs prop>posix_eaccess</hljs>()`
- Executing `<hljs prop>proc_get_status</hljs>()` multiple times will now always return the right value on posix systems.

---

That's it for now, but this list will grow over time. If you want to stay up to date, you can [subscribe to my newsletter](/mail), [follow me on Twitter](/twitter), or [subscribe to my RSS feed](/rss).