Have I ever told you the story of how I got my job? I've now been a developer advocate for PHP at JetBrains for over two years, and I've always thought I was pretty lucky being able to turn what used to be my hobby into my job.

Ok sure, _luck_ had to do with it, but it's mostly because of a blog post I wrote. One blog post, now almost 8 years ago, is what triggered a chain of events that led me to where I'm at today. I oftentimes remind myself of this blog post, and I think it would make an inspiring story to share with you as well.

So, back to 2017. I was working at your average web agency. One of my hobby side projects during that time was to build a static site generator in PHP. I needed a test subject, so I made a small blog to try it out. Eventually I lost interest in the static site generator idea, but the blog stayed. In fact, I'm still using that static generator to build this blog, but I would never want anyone else to use it.

Anyway, I wrote the occasional blog post, and one day I stumbled upon a video on Laracasts. It was titled "[Visual Debt](https://laracasts.com/series/php-bits/episodes/1)" — and boy, did I disagree with everything said in it. 

So I reached for the only platform I had: write a [reaction blog post](/blog/a-programmers-cognitive-load) about it. A couple of weeks later, I checked up on my analytics (I occasionally did so to see how many people were reading my stuff, mostly to boost my ego a little bit). That one post apparently had thousands of views — much more than any of the other posts I had written up until that point. What had happened was that someone I never heard of shared my blog post on his newsletter, which apparently had a huge following, and it spread from there. I could see that pretty easily in my analytics dashboard.

That someone was [Freek](https://freek.dev/). I checked out his website, which led me to his company's website, which made me realise there was this small agency called [Spatie](https://spatie.be/) 30 kilometers from my home, who were actually hiring a new PHP developer. I had been close to burning out on my current job for months now, but I never have had the courage to start a new job search. However, this company really sparked my interest. 

So I sent them a casual mail. I attached my CV, but most importantly, I attached my GitHub account. I was invited for a introductory meeting a week later. It went well, and I was surprised to learn that I didn't have to do any technical tests. They already knew my blog, they knew my GitHub, they knew me. 

I got home that evening, and already had another email in my inbox: "We really liked meeting you, you'd be a great fit for our company. We'd like to invite you for a second meeting." A couple months later, I worked at Spatie. I had an amazing 5 years there, met a lot of cool people within the community (offline and online), which is also how I met Roman, my current colleague at JetBrains. At one point Roman asked me if I wouldn't be interested in joining JetBrains as a Developer Advocate (he had been following my blog and YouTube content) and so here were are.

Had it not been for the one video about Visual Debt by Jeffrey, I doubt I'd be where I'd be today. I simply wrote whatever I wanted to write about back then, I didn't have a content plan, I didn't have a strategy. I kept writing, and apparently it worked out pretty well. 

I've never been a planner or a big strategist, I usually go where the flow takes me. I try to do whatever I like to do. I'm definitely not the most successful businessman, I doubt I'll be able to ever count myself as a true independent entrepreneur, but I don't feel any ambition to be that. I just write some stuff and focus on the things I like to do, and it's leading me to great places.

I'm going through a period of [reflection](/blog/twitter-exit) these days, and it's showing me a lot of stuff I need to work on. But I'm also reminded about a lot of good stuff I'm thankful for. I figured I'd share those things as well, because I think might inspire a handful of people. Working on whatever makes you happy is a valid strategy. Not driven by money or fame, but just because you want to. Put that work out there in public. Not because you want to reach specific goals, but just because you want to. 