I'm probably part of a small group that actually cares about this: the difference between extending an abstract class and implementing an interface (ideally with a trait to provide part of the default implementation). I don't expect that many people to follow my reasoning, but hey, it's my blog, I can write whatever thoughts are coming to my mind 😅 

I've been wrestling with code that _abuses inheritance_ for a couple of years now. Granted: I don't really like the word _abuse_ because it sounds very heavy, and code that _abuses_ inheritance can still work perfectly well. But I also struggle to find a better word for it. Maybe "code that doesn't fit _my_ expectations of what inheritance should be used for". 

I'm frustrated with myself because I can't seem to put into words exactly _why_ I dislike code that's intentionally designed to be extended. It happens a lot in Laravel, but I'm sure it happens in Symfony and other places as well. "Extend from a base class", "override a method" — all in the name of "flexibility" and "configurability". It's a common pattern, but it feels so… icky to me. The practice is so common that a whole community of developers is vocally against using `final`, because it blocks them from accessing that flexibility they gain by extending whatever they want from.

All the while, I'm thinking "this isn't the way inheritance was meant to be used…"

Like I said, it's difficult to put into words, but I think the problem for me started when I watched [Alan Kay's talk about his vision for OOP](https://youtu.be/oKg1hTOQXoY?si=wAIxjBuzmwWiR6Ml&t=811). He describes how you can build a dog house using only a hammer, nails, planks, and just a little bit of skill. Once you've built it you've earned the skills and know-how, you can apply that knowledge to other projects. Next, you want to build a cathedral, using the same approach with your hammer, nails, and planks. It's a 100 times larger, but you've done this before — right? It'll only take a little longer.

