PHP 8.4 will be released on [November 21, 2024](https://wiki.php.net/todo/php84). It'll include property hooks, HTML 5 support, as well as chaining methods on `{php}new` without additional parentheses — a big one!


<iframe width="560" height="347" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/mokBtjyT8fo" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---

### Property hooks <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/property-hooks)</small>

One of the biggest changes in modern-PHP history: the ability to define property hooks, eliminating the need for a lot of boilerplate code.

```php
class BookViewModel
{
    public function __construct(
        private array $authors,
    ) {}

    public string $credits {
        get {
            return implode(', ', array_map(
                fn (Author $author) => $author->name, 
                $this->authors,
            ));
        }
    }
    
    public Author $mainAuthor {
        set (Author $mainAuthor) {
            $this->authors[] = $mainAuthor;
            $this->mainAuthor = $mainAuthor;
        }
        
        get => $this->mainAuthor;
    }
}
```

The goal of property hooks is to remove a lot of getters and setters, by allowing each property to define its own `{:hl-keyword:get:}` and `{:hl-keyword:set:}` hooks. Hooks are optional, and you don't have to add both of them on a specific property. For example, a property with only a `{:hl-keyword:get:}` hook is virtual property.

There is a lot to say about property hooks, and I plan to write a followup post on them soon, so make sure to [subscribe](*/mail) if you want to know when that one is done. One final thing I'd like to mention — probably what I'm most hyped about: property hooks can be defined in interfaces!

```php
interface HasAuthors
{
    public string $credits { get; }
    public Author $mainAuthor { get; set; }
}
```

---

### `{php}new` without parentheses <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/new_without_parentheses)</small>

As if property hooks alone wasn't enough, PHP 8.4 has another feature that will save so much boilerplate code: you don't have to wrap `{php}new` invocations within parenthesis anymore to be able to chain methods on them. So instead of doing this:

```php
$name = (new ReflectionClass($objectOrClass))->getShortName();
```

You can now do this:

```php
$name = new ReflectionClass($objectOrClass)->getShortName();
```

I don't know about you, but I write a lot of code like this, and so I'm super happy that we're finally getting rid of those brackets. It doesn't only work for methods, by the way. You can also chain properties, static methods, constants — whatever you want. You can read all about this new feature in this [dedicated post](/blog/new-with-parentheses-php-84).

---

### Asymmetric visibility <small>[RFC](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/asymmetric-visibility-v2)</small>

Another ground-breaking feature of PHP 8.4 is asymmetric visibility. Asymmetric visibility allows class properties to define their visibility (`{php}public`, `{php}protected`, or `{php}private`), based on the read or write context. The most common example of asymmetric visibility are public properties that can only be changed from within the class. Such a property would look like this:

```php
class BookViewModel
{
    public {:hl-keyword:private(set):} {:hl-type:Author:} $author;
}
```

Because "public properties that can only be changed within a private context" are the most common use-case for asymmetric visibility, there's also a shorthand available:

```php
class BookViewModel
{
    {:hl-keyword:private(set):} {:hl-type:Author:} {:hl-property:$author:}; // same as public private(set)
}
```

Of course, you can also make properties only writeable within the protected scope:

```php
class BookViewModel
{
    public {:hl-keyword:protected(set):} {:hl-type:Author:} $author;
}
```

And naturally, the syntax works for promoted properties as well:

```txt
{:hl-keyword:public function:} {:hl-property:__construct:}(
    {:hl-keyword:private(set):} {:hl-type:Author:} {:hl-property:$author:};
) {}
```

---

### array_find <small>[RFC](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/array_find)</small>

There's a pretty simple new function added in PHP 8.4, one of those functions that you have to wonder about "hang on, wasn't that available yet?" I guess most developers have grown used to third party collection classes, although I think having `{php}array_find()` natively in PHP is pretty nice.

The naming might be a bit confusing though, because what this function does is it takes an array and callback, and will return the _first_ element for which the callback returns `{php}true`:

```php
$firstMatch = array_find(
    $posts, 
    function (Post $post) {
        return strlen($post->title) > 5; 
    }
);
```

There are also some variations of this function called `{php}array_find_key()`, `{php}array_any()` and `{php}array_all()`, you can [read all about them here](/blog/array-find-in-php-84).

---

### Implicit nullable types <small class="breaking">[deprecation](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecate-implicitly-nullable-types)</small>

PHP had this weird behaviour where a typed variable with a default `{php}null` value would be made nullable automatically:

```php
function save(Book $book = null) {}

// Deprecated: Implicitly marking parameter $book as nullable is deprecated,
// the explicit nullable type must be used instead
```

This behaviour is now deprecated and will be removed in PHP 9. The solution is to make `{php}Book` explicitly nullable:

```php
function save(?Book $book = null) {}
```

---

### New HTML5 support <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/domdocument_html5_parser)</small>

PHP 8.4 adds a `{php}\Dom\HTMLDocument` class which is able to parse HTML5 code properly. The old `{php}\DOMDocument` class is still available for backwards compatibility.

```php
$doc = \Dom\HTMLDocument::createFromString($contents);
```

You can read all about the new HTML 5 parser [here](/blog/html-5-in-php-84).

---

### JIT changes <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/jit_config_defaults)</small>

PHP 8.4 changes the way the [JIT](/blog/php-jit) is enabled. Previously, you had to set `opcache.jit_buffer_size` to `0` in order to disable the JIT, but now you can disable it like so:

```ini
opcache.jit=disable
opcache.jit_buffer_size=64m
```

The only way users can be affected by this change is if they did specify a `opcache.jit_buffer_size` but no `opcache.jit`. In that case, you'll have to add `opcache.jit=tracing` to enable the JIT again.

Finally, there have also been some [improvements to the JIT](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/jit-ir) which makes it run faster in some cases, and use less memory.

---

### Lazy objects <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/lazy-objects)</small>

Finally, PHP 8.4 adds native support for lazy objects, a common pattern used by frameworks to build proxy objects with. 

```php
$initializer = static function (MyClass $proxy): MyClass {
    return new MyClass(123);
};
 
$reflector = new ReflectionClass(MyClass::class);

$object = $reflector->newLazyProxy($initializer);
```

---

### Exit and die as functions <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/exit-as-function)</small>

In PHP, `{php}exit` (and its alias `{php}die`) are kind of weird _things_: they can be used as a keyword like so: `{php}exit;`, but also like a function: `{php}exit(0);`. The function variant though isn't really a function, rather it is something that kind of behaves like a function, but not entirely:

- it didn't support named arguments;
- it couldn't be passed as a callable;
- it ignored `{:hl-property:strict_types:}`; and
- it did not follow usual type juggling semantics.

With PHP 8.4 though, `{php}exit()` and `{php}die()` are now properly treated as functions, and all of the above has been fixed. Note that the keyword variant without brackets of course still works the same.

---

### The `{php}#[Deprecated]` attribute <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecated_attribute)</small>

PHP now has a built-in attribute that can be used to mark methods, functions, and classes deprecated. Previously, you could already use a docblock like `{php}/** @deprecated */`, but PHP itself didn't do anything with it. While static analysers and IDEs were able to interpret these docblocks, you'd need external tooling to make sure all userland deprecations were detected.

Packages and frameworks can now instead rely on PHP's built-in `{php}#[Deprecated]` attribute, which also supports adding some metadata:

```php
#[Deprecated("use newFunction() instead", since: "tempest/framework:1.1")]
function oldFunction() {
    // …
}
```

---

### Smaller additions

- The new `{php}request_parse_body()` function that allows parsing RFC1867 (multipart)
  requests in non-POST HTTP requests. [Read more](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/rfc1867-non-post)
- There are new static constructors to create `{php}DateTime` and `{php}DateTimeImmutable` objects from a timestamp: `{php}DateTime::createFromTimestamp($timestamp)` and `{php}DateTimeImmutable::createFromTimestamp($timestamp)`
- There are two new functions related to microseconds on `{php}DateTime` and `{php}DateTimeImmutable` objects: `{php}DateTime::getMicrosecond()` and `{php}DateTimeImmutable::setMicrosecond($microsecond)`
- There's now support for driver-specific PDO subclasses. [Read more](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/pdo_driver_specific_subclasses)
- There's new support for driver-specific SQL parsers. [Read more](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/pdo_driver_specific_parsers)

---

### Backwards incompatible changes

- The `E_STRICT` constant is deprecated and its corresponding error level is removed. [Read more](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecations_php_8_4#remove_e_strict_error_level_and_deprecate_e_strict_constant)
- Some DOM element properties have been deprecated. [Read more](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecations_php_8_4#formally_deprecate_soft-deprecated_domdocument_and_domentity_properties)
- The GMP class is now final and cannot be extended anymore. [Read more](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/gmp-final)
- Additional value errors in MBString. [Read more](*https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/PHP-8.4.0/UPGRADING#L87)
- Additional value errors in PCNTL. [Read more](*https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/PHP-8.4.0/UPGRADING#L129)
- [Read the full list here](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/PHP-8.4.0/UPGRADING#L19)

---

<iframe width="560" height="347" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/mokBtjyT8fo" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

{{ cta:mail }}
