---
title: "What's new in PHP 8.3"
next: new-in-php-82
meta:
    description: 'All new features, performance upgrades, and deprecations in PHP 8.3'
    template: blog/meta/new-in-php-83.twig
footnotes:
    - { link: /blog/cloning-readonly-properties-in-php-83, title: 'Cloning readonly properties in PHP 8.3' }
    - { link: /blog/override-in-php-83, title: 'The #[Override] attribute in PHP 8.3' }
    - { link: /blog/new-in-php-82, title: "What's new in PHP 8.2" }
    - { link: /blog/new-in-php-81, title: "What's new in PHP 8.1" }
    - { link: /blog/new-in-php-8, title: "What's new in PHP 8" }
    - { link: /blog/new-in-php-74, title: "What's new in PHP 7.4" }
---

<p><iframe width="560" height="422" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/nJFsD0bnlTI" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe></p>

**PHP 8.3 is released on [November 23, 2023](https://wiki.php.net/todo/php83)**; it has improvements to readonly classes, the new `json_validate()` function, additions to the recently added `Randomizer` class, stack overflow detection, and more. 

In this post, we'll go through all features, performance improvements, changes and deprecations one by one. If you want to stay up to date, you can [subscribe to my newsletter](/mail), [follow me on Twitter](/twitter), or [subscribe to my RSS feed](/rss).

{{ ad:carbon }}

### Readonly amendments <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/readonly_amendments)</small>

This RFC proposed two changes, only one was accepted: being able to reinitialize readonly properties while cloning. That might sound like a very big deal, but this RFC only addresses a very specific (but important) edge case: overwriting property values within `__clone()`, in order to allow deep cloning readonly properties. 

```php
readonly class Post
{
    public function __construct(
        public DateTime $createdAt,
    ) {}
    
    public function __clone()
    {
        $this->createdAt = new DateTime(); 
        // This is allowed,
        // even though `createdAt` is a readonly property.
    }
}
```

You can read an in-depth post about this RFC and some sidenotes [here](/blog/cloning-readonly-properties-in-php-83).

---

### Typed class constants <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/typed_class_constants)</small>

You can now typehint class constants:

```php
class Foo
{
    const string BAR = 'baz'; 
} 
```

---

### `#[Override]` attribute <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/marking_overriden_methods)</small>

The new `#[Override]` attribute is used to show a programmer's intent. It basically says "I know this method is overriding a parent method. If that would ever change, please let me know". 

Here's an example:

```php
abstract class Parent
{
    public function methodWithDefaultImplementation(): int
    {
        return 1;
    }
}

final class Child extends Parent
{
    #[Override]
    public function methodWithDefaultImplementation(): int
    {
        return 2; // The overridden method
    }
} 
```

Now, let's imagine at one point the parent method changes its method name:

```php
abstract class Parent
{
    public function methodWithNewImplementation(): int
    {
        return 1;
    }
}
```

Thanks to the `#[Override]` attribute, PHP will be able to detect that `Child::methodWithDefaultImplementation()` doesn't override anything anymore, and it will throw an error.

You can [read more about the `#[Override]` attribute here](/blog/override-in-php-83).

---

## Negative indices in arrays <small>[breaking](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING#L19)</small>

If you have an empty array, add an item with a _negative_ index, and then add another item, that second item would always start at index `0`:

```php
$array = [];

$array[-5] = 'a';
$array[] = 'b';

var_export($array);

//array (
//  -5 => 'a',
//  0 => 'b',
//)
```

Starting from PHP 8.3, the next item will be added at index `-4`:

```php
//array (
//  -5 => 'a',
//  -4 => 'b',
//)
```

---

### Anonymous readonly classes <small>[UPGRADING](*https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING#L48)</small>

Previously, you weren't able to mark anonymous classes as readonly. That's fixed in PHP 8.3:

```php
$class = new readonly class {
    public function __construct(
        public string $foo = 'bar',
    ) {}
};
```

---

### The new `json_validate()` function <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/json_validate)</small>

Previously, the only way to validate whether a string was valid JSON, was to decode it and detect whether any errors were thrown. This new `json_validate()` function is beneficial if you only need to know whether the input is valid JSON, since it uses less memory compared to decoding the string.

```php
json_validate(string $json, int $depth = 512, int $flags = 0): bool
```

---

### `Randomizer` additions <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/randomizer_additions)</small>

PHP 8.2 added the new [Randomizer](/blog/new-in-php-82#new-random-extension-rfc) class. This update brings some small additions:

```php
Randomizer::getBytesFromString(string $string, int $length): string
```

This method allows you to generate a string with a given length that consists of randomly selected bytes from a given string.


```php
Randomizer::getFloat(
    float $min,
    float $max,
    IntervalBoundary $boundary = IntervalBoundary::ClosedOpen
): float
```

`getFloat()` returns a float between `$min` and `$max`. You can define whether `$min` and `$max` should be included thanks to the `IntervalBoundary` enum. `Closed` means the value is included, while `Open` means excluded.

```php
Randomizer::nextFloat(): float {}
```

Finally, `nextFloat()` is a shorthand for `getFloat(0, 1, IntervalBoundary::ClosedOpen)`, in other words: it'll give you a random float between 0 and 1, where 1 is excluded.

---

### Dynamic class constant fetch <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/dynamic_class_constant_fetch)</small>

PHP 8.3 allows you to fetch constants with a more dynamic syntax:

```php
class Foo 
{
    const BAR = 'bar';
}

$name = 'BAR';
 
// Instead of this:
constant(Foo::class . '::' . $name);

// You can now do this:
Foo::{$name};
```

---

### More Appropriate Date/Time Exceptions <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/datetime-exceptions)</small> <small>[breaking](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/datetime-exceptions#backward_incompatible_changes)</small>

In many cases, PHP would simply throw an `Exception` or `Error` object; or emit a warning or error when something went wrong in dealing with dates and times. This RFC goes through all those edge cases and adds proper, dedicated exceptions for them.

We now have exceptions like `DateMalformedIntervalStringException`, `DateInvalidOperationException`, and `DateRangeError`.

In general, these additions won't break any code, since these newly added exceptions and errors subclass the generic `Exception` and `Error` classes. However, there are three small breaking changes that come with this RFC:

- The `Epoch doesn't fit in a PHP integer` now returns a new `DateRangeError` instead of a generic `ValueError`, which it does not subclass. This is only an issue for 32-bit platforms.
- The `Only non-special relative time specifications are supported for subtraction` warning with `DateTime::sub()` and `date_sub()` becomes a new `DateInvalidOperationException`.
- The `Unknown or bad format (%s) at position %d (%c): %s` and `String '%s' contains non-relative elements` warnings that are created while parsing wrong/broken `DateInterval` strings will now throw a new `DateMalformedIntervalStringException` when used with the OO interface, instead of showing a warning and returning false.

---

### Improved `unserialize()` error handling <small>[RFC](*https://wiki.php.net/rfc/improve_unserialize_error_handling)</small>

`unserialize()` will now always emit a `E_WARNING` when running into problems instead of sometimes an `E_NOTICE`.

This RFC also proposed adding more exceptions when running `unserialize()`, but that part didn't get accepted.

---

### Changes to the `range()` function <small>[breaking](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING#L19)</small>

From the changelog:

- A `TypeError` is now thrown when passing objects, resources, or arrays as the boundary inputs
- A more descriptive `ValueError` is thrown when passing 0 for `$step`
- A `ValueError` is now thrown when using a negative `$step` for increasing ranges
- If `$step` is a float that can be interpreted as an int, it is now done so
- A `ValueError` is now thrown if any argument is `infinity` or `NAN`
- An `E_WARNING` is now emitted if `$start` or `$end` is the empty string. The value continues to be cast to the value 0.
- An `E_WARNING` is now emitted if `$start` or `$end` has more than one byte, only if it is a non-numeric string.
- An `E_WARNING` is now emitted if `$start` or `$end` is cast to an integer because the other boundary input is a number. (e.g. `range(5, 'z');`)
- An `E_WARNING` is now emitted if $step is a float when trying to generate a range of characters, except if both boundary inputs are numeric strings (e.g. `range('5', '9', 0.5);` does not produce a warning)
- `range()` now produce a list of characters if one of the boundary inputs is a string digit instead of casting the other input to int (e.g. `range('5', 'z');`)

---

### Traits and static properties <small>[breaking](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING#L19)</small>

From the changelog:

> Uses of traits with static properties will now redeclare static properties inherited from the parent class. This will create a separate static property storage for the current class. This is analogous to adding the static property to the class directly without traits.

---

### Stack overflow detection <small>[PR](*https://github.com/php/php-src/pull/9104)</small>

PHP 8.3 adds two new ini directives called `zend.max_allowed_stack_size` and `zend.reserved_stack_size`. Programs that are close to overflowing the call stack may now throw an `Error` when using more than the difference between `zend.max_allowed_stack_size` and `zend.reserved_stack_size`.

The benefit of this feature is that stack-overflow-induced segmentation faults won't result in segfaults anymore, making debugging a lot easier. 

The default for `zend.max_allowed_stack_size` is `0`, meaning PHP will automatically determine a value. You can also provide `-1` to indicate there isn't a limit, or a specific number of bytes. The `zend.reserved_stack_size` directive is used to determine the "buffer zone", so that PHP is able to still throw an error instead of actually running out of memory. The value here should be a number of bytes, but PHP will determine a reasonable default for you, so you don't necessarily need to set it, unless you're running into edge cases for specific programs.

On a final note, for fibers, the existing `fiber.stack_size` directive is used as the max allowed stack size.

```ini
zend.max_allowed_stack_size=128K
```

---

### New `mb_str_pad` function <small>[RFC](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/mb_str_pad)</small>

From the RFC:

> In PHP, various string functions are available in two variants: one for byte strings and another for multibyte strings. However, a notable absence among the multibyte string functions is a `mbstring` equivalent of `str_pad()`. The `str_pad()` function lacks multibyte character support, causing issues when working with languages that utilize multibyte encodings like UTF-8. This RFC proposes the addition of such a function to PHP, which we will call `mb_str_pad()`.

The function looks like this:

```php
function mb_str_pad(
    string $string, 
    int $length, 
    string $pad_string = " ", 
    int $pad_type = STR_PAD_RIGHT, 
    ?string $encoding = null,
): string {}
```

---

### Magic method closures and named arguments <small>[PR](https://github.com/php/php-src/commit/61e1f8aaebdd0f609ae6be5453d0bbab001cef12)</small>

Let's say you have a class that supports magic methods:

```php
class Test {
    public function __call($name, $args) 
    {
        var_dump($name, $args);
    }
    
    public static function __callStatic($name, $args) {
        var_dump($name, $args);
    }
}
```

PHP 8.3 allows you to create closures from those methods, and then pass named arguments to those closures. That wasn't possible before.

```php
$test = new Test();

$closure = $test->magic(...);

$closure(a: 'hello', b: 'world'); 
```

---

### Invariant constant visibility <small>[breaking](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING)</small>

Previously, visibility for constants weren't checked when implementing an interface. PHP 8.3 fixes this bug, but it might lead to code breaking in some places if you weren't aware of this behaviour.

```php
interface I {
    public const FOO = 'foo';
}

class C implements I {
    private const FOO = 'foo';
}
```

---

### The small deprecations RFC <small>[rfc](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/deprecations_php_8_3)</small>

As is usual with every release, there's a single RFC that adds a bunch of small deprecations. Keep in mind that [deprecations are no errors](/blog/dealing-with-deprecations), and these are generally a good thing for the language to move forward. These are the deprecations that passed, you can read more details about them in the RFC:

- Deprecate passing negative `$widths` to `mb_strimwidth()`
- Deprecate and remove the `NumberFormatter::TYPE_CURRENCY` constant
- Deprecate and remove the broken pre-PHP 7.1 Mt19937 implementation (`MT_RAND_PHP`)
- Deprecate and remove calling `ldap_connect()` with 2 parameters `$host` and `$port`
- [Deprecate remains of string evaluated code assertions](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/assert-string-eval-cleanup)

---

### Small, but notable changes

Not every change in PHP passes the RFC process. In fact, the majority of changes include maintenance and bugfixing, and don't require an RFC. All of these changes are listed in the [UPGRADING](https://github.com/php/php-src/blob/master/UPGRADING) document. I'll list some of the most prominent ones, but you should definitely read throughout the whole list if you want to know about the tiniest details.

- When using [FFI](/blog/new-in-php-74#foreign-function-interface-rfc), C functions that have a return type of `void` now return `null` instead of returning `FFI\CData:void`
- `posix_getrlimit()` now takes an optional `$res` parameter to allow fetching a single resource limit.
- `gc_status()` has four new fields: `running`, `protected`, `full`, and `buffer_size`.
- `class_alias()` now supports creating an alias of an internal class.
- `mysqli_poll()` now raises a `ValueError` when the read nor error arguments are passed.
- `array_pad()` is now only limited by the maximum number of elements an array can have. Before, it was only possible to add at most 1048576 elements at a time.
- New posix functions: `posix_sysconf()`, `posix_pathconf()`, `posix_fpathconf()`, and `posix_eaccess()`
- Executing `proc_get_status()` multiple times will now always return the right value on posix systems.
- `opcache.consistency_checks` ini directive was removed
- [Improved `array_sum()` and `array_product()`](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/saner-array-sum-product)

---

That's it for now, but this list will grow over time. If you want to stay up to date, you can [subscribe to my newsletter](/mail), [follow me on Twitter](/twitter), or [subscribe to my RSS feed](/rss).
