---
title: 'HTML 5 support in PHP 8.4'
meta:
    description: 'PHP 8.4 adds a new HTML-5 compliant parser'
disableAds: true
footnotes:
    - { link: /blog/new-in-php-84, title: "What's new in PHP 8.4" }
    - { link: 'https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cjHRWio-c3M', title: 'Read with me through the RFC' }
    - { link: 'https://wiki.php.net/rfc/domdocument_html5_parser', title: 'Read the full RFC' }
---

Even though HTML 5 has been around for over 16 years, PHP never had proper support for it. PHP does have `{php}\DOMDocument`, which _in theory_ should support HTML 4, but it isn't _really_ HTML 4 compliant anymore. 

So, yeah, classic PHP — right 😅? Well, we can laugh all we want, but let's take a moment to highlight new features that — albeit late — fix these quirks: [PHP 8.4](/blog/new-in-php-84) is adding an HTML 5 compliant parser! In this post I'll go through the highlights of this new parser, and you can read with me through the whole RFC as well:

<iframe width="560" height="345" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/cjHRWio-c3M" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Backwards compatible

One of the core requirements for this new parser is that it should be fully backwards compatible. That's why internals have chosen to make a completely new class — within a new namespace — to house the new HTML 5 parser. The old `{php}\DOMDocument` class is left (mostly) alone. The only change in the old implementation is that `{php}\DOMDocument` now extends the abstract `{php}\Dom\Document` class, which is also the parent for the new, HTML 5 compliant implementation: `{php}\Dom\HTMLDocument`. 

If you want to use PHP's new HTML 5 parser, that's the one you need:

```php
// HTML 5 compliant
$dom = \Dom\HTMLDocument::createFromString($html); 
```

While the old version is still available as usual:

```php
// HTML 4-ish support
$oldDom = new \DOMDocument(); 
$oldDom->loadHTML($html);
```

## Constructing DOMs

One key difference you'll spot immediately is that the new implementation relies on static constructors instead of calling methods on the newly created object afterward. The new `{php}HTMLDocument` class has three named constructors available:

```php
HTMLDocument::createEmpty();
HTMLDocument::createFromFile($path);
HTMLDocument::createFromString($html);
```

These are their full signatures:

```php
public static function createEmpty(string $encoding = "UTF-8"): HTMLDocument;
public static function createFromFile(string $path, int $options = 0, ?string $override_encoding = null): HTMLDocument;
public static function createFromString(string $source, int $options = 0, ?string $override_encoding = null): HTMLDocument;
```

For the `$options` variable, these options are available: 

- `{:hl-property:LIBXML_HTML_NOIMPLIED:}`
- `{:hl-property:LIBXML_COMPACT:}`
- `{:hl-property:LIBXML_NOERROR:}`
- `{:hl-type:\Dom\:}{:hl-property:NO_DEFAULT_NS:}`

The `$override_encoding` variable is used to override the implicit encoding detection routines as determined by the HTML parser spec. This can be useful when the document is downloaded manually.

## DOM Objects

Note that using the new implementation will result in other types of value objects to be created as well. For example, instead of `{php}\DOMNode`, you'll get `{php}\DOM\Node`; instead of `{php}\DOMElement`, you'll get `{php}\DOM\Element`, etc. The RFC originally aimed to keep these objects the same between the old and new implementation, but there turned out to be too many differences. You can read all about them [here](https://wiki.php.net/rfc/opt_in_dom_spec_compliance).

---

Albeit a bit late, I think this is a very nice addition to PHP. I definitely have some usecases for it! What are your thoughts? You can leave them in the comments down below!  